---
layout: pr
date: 2019-12-18
title: "Add make check-valgrind to run the unit tests under Valgrind"
pr: 17639
authors: [practicalswift]
components: ["tests"]
host: jonatack
status: past
---

## Notes

### Definitions

- [Undefined Behavior (UB)](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/ub):
  there are no restrictions on the behavior of the program if certain rules of
  the language are violated. Examples of undefined behavior are uninitialized
  scalars, memory access outside of array bounds, signed integer overflow, null
  pointer dereference, access to an object through a pointer of a different
  type, etc. Compilers are not required to handle undefined behavior (although
  many simple situations are diagnosed), and the compiled program is not
  required to do anything meaningful.

- **Uninitialized variables** are Undefined Behavior, a typical outcome of which
  is reading stale stack or register values. In the best case, it generates a
  pseudorandom result which in edge cases might be the expected result or fixed
  by the compiler. In the worst case, an exploit may be created that leaks
  secrets by allowing use of an attacker-controlled value.

- [MemorySanitizer (MSan)](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/MemorySanitizer.html)
  ([wiki](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/MemorySanitizer)) is a tool
  that detects uninitialized reads. It consists of a compiler instrumentation
  module and a run-time library. Typical slowdown is 3x and memory usage is
  2x. MSan is supported on Linux/NetBSD/FreeBSD and requires compiling and
  linking all the code in your program, including libraries it uses and the C++
  standard library, with `-fsanitize=memory -fPIE -pie`.

- [Valgrind](http://valgrind.org/) is a debugging and profiling tool suite to
  make programs faster and more correct. Its most popular tool, Memcheck, can
  detect memory-related errors common in C and C++ programs that can lead to
  crashes and unpredictable behavior. Here is a
  [tutorial](https://www.cprogramming.com/debugging/valgrind.html). Memcheck is
  not perfect: typical slowdown is 3-10x, memory usage is 2x, it can produce
  false positives (there are
  [mechanisms](http://valgrind.org/docs/manual/manual-core.html#manual-core.suppress)
  for suppressing these; see the
  [valgrind.supp](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.19/contrib/valgrind.supp)
  file in Bitcoin Core), and it doesn't currently detect out-of-range reads or
  writes to arrays allocated statically or on the stack.

### Events

- On 10 November 2019, [bitcoinVBR](https://github.com/bitcoinVBR) opened [PR
17433](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17433) "fix
nMinerConfirmationWindow not initialized". The PR was misunderstood as a style
change and closed.

- On 12 November, bitcoinVBR opened a similar change in [PR
17448](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17448) "remove unused variable-
consensus.nMinerConfirmationWindow". Despite a bad merge by the author while
making the PR, the issue had became clear.

- On 14 November, a clean third version was merged, [PR
17449](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17449) "fix uninitialized
variable nMinerConfirmationWindow". It was for this 2-line fix that the Bitcoin
Core [0.19.0.1 patch release](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commits/0.19)
was made -- an unusual event.

- What was the issue? An uninitialized read in [PR
16713](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16713), merged 27 September 2019,
that got past review by more than a half dozen reviewers (and also [your
host](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16713#pullrequestreview-291029801)
today).

- How did this flaw escape detection?
  - The uninitialized read (of nMinerConfirmationWindow) took place [on mainnet
and testnet but not on
regtest](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17449#issuecomment-552843096).
  - Memory sanitizer [was not
enabled](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17449#issuecomment-552889851)
in the tests and CI.
  - [The compilers were "fixing" our
code](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17449#issuecomment-552901592) in
both Clang and GCC with the Bitcoin Core default setting of `-O2`.

- On 30 October, [PR 15921](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15921) -- [a
 review club PR](https://bitcoincore.reviews/15921.html) with quite a few ACKs -- was
 merged which contained another uninitialized read. Bitcoin Core contributor
 [practicalswift](https://github.com/practicalswift) found the issue by
 compiling Bitcoin with `-fsanitize=memory` and with valgrind, which both caught
 the issue. It was fixed in [PR
 17624](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17624).

- On 29 November, practicalswift opened [PR
17633](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17633) to enable running the
functional tests with valgrind memcheck, which was recently merged. Note that
the valgrind `--exit-on-first-error=yes` option is available since version 3.14
on Linux. Valgrind support on macOS may be more limited. [A PR is
open](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17732) to automate setting that
exit flag when running functional tests with valgrind.

- On 30 November, practicalswift opened today's [PR
17639](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17639) to enable running the unit
tests with valgrind memcheck.

### What can we do to mitigate uninitialized variables?

- Recommended reading: the discussion in [PR
  17627](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17627) "Suppress false positive
  warning about uninitialized entropy buffers".

- Test/fuzz/review better... or just write perfect code.
  - We do these things (test, fuzz, and review), but the recent issues show that
    it's not enough.
  - Attackers may find what programmers don't think of, and what fuzzers don't
    hit.

- Compile with `-Werror=uninitialized` or `-Wconditional-uninitialized` and fix
  all uninitialized variables in the codebase.
  - A fair amount of code to change.
  - The value chosen to initialize doesn't necessarily make sense.
  - Code may not express intent anymore.
  - Similarly, static analysis isn't smart enough.

- Use MemorySanitizer or valgrind.
  - MSan requires compiling everything in the process, which is cumbersome.
  - Can't deploy in production.
  - Several times slower and memory-hungry.
  - Resource exhaustion can generate false positives.

- Pre-initialize variables with dummy values, e.g. compile with Clang `-ftrivial-auto-var-init=pattern`.
  - Raises [testing sensitivity
  concerns](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17627#issuecomment-562387426).
  - If a flaw is introduced, it may be undetectable by valgrind.
  - Compilers can warn when they're certain a value will be
    undefined, and pre-emptive dummy initialization breaks those warnings.
  - Valgrind has special macros that can be used to mark memory as undefined. It
    may be best if dummy initialization were to be always done via a macro that
    would allow disabling it for testing, or valgrind annotating it.

### Sources/resources (credit to [practicalswift](https://github.com/practicalswift) for most of these)

- [RFC: Enabling commonly enabled compiler
  diagnostics](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17344).

- [Guide to setting up MSan for Bitcoin
  Core](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17620#issuecomment-559156227).

- [Reading
  list](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17627#issuecomment-559436518) on
  the pros/cons of default initialization.

- Video of JF Bastien talk ["Mitigating Undefined
  Behavior"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I-XUHPimq3o), LLVM Developers'
  Meeting, December 11, 2019.

- Blog post ["Building better software with better tools: sanitizers versus
  valgrind"](https://lemire.me/blog/2019/05/16/building-better-software-with-better-tools-sanitizers-versus-valgrind/),
  May 2019.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK \<commit\>, or
  NACK?](https://github.com/jonatack/bitcoin-development/blob/master/how-to-review-bitcoin-core-prs.md#peer-review)&nbsp;
  Were you able to run the unit tests with valgrind? Don't forget to put your PR
  review on GitHub or [ask
  questions](https://github.com/jonatack/bitcoin-development/blob/master/how-to-review-bitcoin-core-prs.md#ask-questions).

2. Have you tried reproducing and catching the uninitialized read errors that
   were found?

3. Which options do you use -- or plan to begin using -- to catch these?

4. What would be the best way to generalize detecting uninitialized variables
   reliably in Bitcoin Core?

5. Extra credit: [can you improve the PR to run the tests in
   parallel](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17639#discussion_r354206723)
   in a way that prints generated suppressions to the user and does not
   potentially introduce false positives due to resource exhaustion?

## Meeting Log

18:33 <jonatack> Hi everyone, we'll get started a little under a half hour
18:34 <jonatack> About the session notes today: if you have any corrections or improvements to suggest, please share!
18:35 <jonatack> I'd like the notes, questions, and discussion to be a resource that people can use or come back to on this subject.
19:00 <jonatack> #startmeeting
19:00 <MarcoFalke> hi
19:00 <fanquake> hi
19:00 <emzy>  Hi
19:00 <jonatack> Hi all! Welcome to this week's episode of the Bitcoin Core PR Review club!
19:00 <amiti> hi
19:00 <jnewbery_6> hi
19:00 <jonatack> #topic Today we are looking at PR 17639, "Add make check-valgrind to run the unit tests under Valgrind (tests)".
19:00 <jonatack> We usually start Bitcoin Core IRC meetings with a 'hi' so it's clear who's at keyboard. Feel free to say hi, even if you arrive in the middle of the meeting!
19:00 <jkczyz> hi
19:00 <jonatack> Please jump in at any point with thoughts and questions. Don't be shy! This discussion is about your thoughts and input.
19:00 <jonatack> If you didn't have the chance to read the notes yet, I encourage you to do so.
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:00 <jonatack> I think they provide a good background summary for this discussion and for reviewing the PR.
19:00 <jonatack> For today's episode, I thought we could begin by talking about review of this PR.
19:00 <jonatack> And then springboard from the PR out to a larger discussion on preventing errors like this
19:01 <jonatack> both on an individual level of integrating helpful tools into our testing and reviewing workflow
19:01 <michaelfolkson> Excellent
19:01 <michaelfolkson> *notes
19:01 <jonatack> and on the broader level of the Bitcoin Core project itself
19:01 <kanzure> hi
19:01 <jonatack> which is certainly an issue that the maintainers are thinking about
19:01 <jonatack> That said, feel free to digress, comment, and ask questions at any time without waiting. Just jump in and go for it. The more the merrier!
19:01 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: ty
19:02 <jonatack> #topic Did you review the PR? Thoughts? Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK <commit>, or NACK?
19:02 <jonatack> Were you able to run the unit tests with valgrind?
19:03 <jonatack> For me, they start but then seem stalled at "Running 387 test cases...", so i need to debug that
19:03 <michaelfolkson> Not on Mac OS. Getting set up on Ubuntu now
19:04 <amiti> I was v disappointed to find out that valgrind is incompatible with catalina
19:04 <jonatack> yes, macOS users get better clang and worse valgrinding, iiuc
19:04 <emzy> ACK. But I had to remove "--exit-on-first-error=yes --error-exitcode=1" from the makefile. Because my debian 10 has only valgrind-3.12.0.SVN
19:05 <jonatack> emzy: good point, that flag is v3.14 and later
19:05 <emzy> jonatack: right
19:06 <jonatack> i was surprised that the unit tests hang, because the functional tests run for me with the --valgrind flag (though they time out and i have to fiddle with the suppresions file)
19:06 <jonatack> suppressions*
19:06 <fanquake> emzy how are you installing it? Debian 10 has Valgrind 3.14: https://packages.debian.org/buster/valgrind
19:07 <jonatack> note that there is a good first issue opened by MarcoFalke to fix the functional test valgrind timeouts to make it more useable
19:08 <emzy> fanquake: my bad. I have Debian GNU/Linux 9.11 (stretch) on that machine... I have to update.
19:08 <MarcoFalke> Jup, it is for the ci/travis run. Looks like someone is working on it already: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17770
19:09 <andrewtoth_> hi
19:10 <jonatack> nice. the GFI tag seems to work well.
19:10 <jonatack> emzy: so today's PR worked for you after rm-ing that flag? How long did the unit tests take to run?
19:11 <emzy> jonatack: not shure. I will run it now, and time it.
19:12 <michaelfolkson> Will they be done by the end of this meeting?
19:12 <MarcoFalke> I'd say no
19:13 <jonatack> emzy: i'm interested, because reading the manual and searching online i saw varying perf figures: 3x, 10x, 30-40x, 50x, and up to 300x slowdowns
19:13 <jonatack> it's module-dependent, but here we're interested in the default memcheck perf, i think
19:14 <emzy> I think it was about 20 min. But I was not watching :)
19:14 <emzy> I was building without qt.
19:14 <jonatack> emzy: be sure to put your review on GH when you can.
19:15 <emzy> ok
19:15 <jonatack> topic Have you tried reproducing and catching the uninitialized read errors that were found?
19:15 <jonatack> #topic Have you tried reproducing and catching the uninitialized read errors that were found?
19:15 <emzy> no
19:17 <MarcoFalke> I think both of them need a node that has finished IBD
19:17 <jonatack> I did a few days ago while reviewing one of practicalswift's valgrind PRs. MarcoFalke: yes i was out of IBD.
19:18 <jonatack> Thanks to help from MarcoFalke and practitalswift. The main issue for me was the suppressions file needed additions.
19:20 <michaelfolkson> One of them needed booting up on mainnet to replicate I read but not full IBD. Made me feel bad about always running tests on regtest
19:20 <jonatack> Question: which of the tools mentioned in the notes do you like using for your own workflow, or plan to adopt?
19:22 <jonatack> e.g. MSan, valgrind, -Werror= / -Wconditional=, etc
19:22 <jonatack> each of them seems to have tradeoffs
19:23 <jonatack> MSan is cumbersome to set up and use AFAICT
19:23 <jonatack> Valgrind seems even slower than MSan
19:23 <michaelfolkson> MSan works on Mac?
19:24 <michaelfolkson> It appears no
19:24 <amiti> I tried using the memory sanitizer on mac & ran into issues as well
19:25 <jonatack> MSan compat: in https://clang.llvm.org/docs/MemorySanitizer.html it says Linux/NetBSD/FreeBSD
19:25 <jonatack> I'm learning here too
19:26 <jonatack> amiti: can you describe the issues you encountered?
19:26 <michaelfolkson> Regardless these tools are intense. Are we moving to a world with two tiers of testers? Most that don't run these tools and a small minority that do?
19:26 <amiti> I'm trying to remember ...
19:27 <jonatack> I have not yet tried MSan, only valgrind and various clang compile flags
19:27 <emzy> would it be enough to run Valgrind on one OS. Or have you also check on others?
19:28 <jonatack> practicalswift did a tutorial here on installing MSan in a Bitcoin Core issue: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17620#issuecomment-559156227
19:28 <jonatack> he walked provoostenator through it to help get him set up
19:29 <michaelfolkson> Or we try to identify which tests should be run with Valgrind, MSan and which don't need to be...
19:29 <MarcoFalke> emzy: In theory it would have to be run on each shipped binary (thus each OS), because slightly different code is compiled for each OS
19:29 <MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: All tests should be run in valgrind, msan, ... etc :)
19:30 <emzy> ok makes sense. could be that there are OS specific code segments.
19:31 <michaelfolkson> MarcoFalke: But there could be two tiers of testers? A non-Valgrind/MSan tested ACK and a Valgrind tested ACK?
19:31 <MarcoFalke> emzy: Jup
19:31 <jonatack> MarcoFalke: how feasible does it seem to have CI run these (assuming the CI provider works properly...)
19:32 <MarcoFalke> jonatack: It already does :)
19:32 <jonatack> oh?
19:32 <emzy> nice
19:32 <jonatack> Things move fast on Bitcoin Core :)
19:32 <MarcoFalke> Heh, this is on current master: https://travis-ci.org/bitcoin/bitcoin/jobs/626430212
19:32 <michaelfolkson> Ah
19:33 <MarcoFalke> It wraps all binaries in valgrind (see the wrap-valgrind step and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/ci/test/wrap-valgrind.sh )
19:34 <MarcoFalke> Then runs the tests as normal (make check && ./test/functional/test_runner.py)
19:34 <MarcoFalke> Well, not all functional tests
19:34 <MarcoFalke> See https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17770
19:35 <emzy> "make check-valgrind" took 21 minutes for me. "./configure --enable-hardening --without-gui --disable-wallet"
19:36 <jonatack> emzy: that's reasonable, something i could run on critical PRs
19:37 <emzy> I will try again on Debian 10. Maybe the newer valgrind is slower.
19:38 <jonatack> MarcoFalke: Is there a CI build that runs memory checks than valgrind? MSan, Werror, etc?
19:38 <jonatack> other than*
19:38 <MarcoFalke> not yet
19:38 <jonatack> What plans?
19:39 <MarcoFalke> I presume the -Werror=uninitialized had a lot of false positives?
19:39 <MarcoFalke> MSan is a subset of what valgrind does, so it doesn't seem worth it
19:40 <MarcoFalke> Source: https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/MemorySanitizer (search for "subset")
19:41 <jonatack> This article suggests some advantages of sanitizers over valgrind https://lemire.me/blog/2019/05/16/building-better-software-with-better-tools-sanitizers-versus-valgrind/
19:42 <jonatack> MarcoFalke's link: "MSan implements a subset of functionality found in Valgrind (Memcheck tool). It is significantly faster than Memcheck (TODO:benchmark)."
19:43 <jonatack> #topic Is it feasible to run the unit tests in parallel with valgrind?
19:43 <MarcoFalke> I mean I won't object someone contributing a ci run that builds with msan
19:43 <MarcoFalke> jonatack: Yes, travis does it
19:44 <MarcoFalke> See my link above
19:45 <MarcoFalke> Takes about 30 minutes (with wallet unit tests, etc), but it works
19:45 <jonatack> I recall the Valgrind manual has a section about running in parallel
19:45 <jonatack> MarcoFalke: great!
19:45 <fanquake> 27m26.144s to run make check-valgrind inside a debian container on my machine
19:46 <fanquake> That's with minimum depends, so skipping a bunch of tests
19:47 <jonatack> I'd like to get in the habit of running individual unit tests with valgrind. For example, after working on a new test, doing a final valgrind check before pushing.
19:50 <michaelfolkson> I have a question on initialization. I'm trying to reconcile the advice from the video, basically "always initialize local variables" and Greg's "No constant is an acceptable random value"
19:51 <michaelfolkson> Greg's advice is Bitcoin specific right? Because a constant would be more dangerous than an uninitialized variable?
19:51 <jonatack> MarcoFalke: I don't recall false positives with the (few) times I tried -Werror but it was with the --enable-werror flag, which might be different?
19:52 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: good question
19:52 <MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: How is valgrind supposed to find the uninitizlied variable when it was initialized by you?
19:53 <MarcoFalke> And how do you know what value to inizialize to when the value is supposed to be passed in or parsed from somwhere else?
19:54 <michaelfolkson> MarcoFalke: It isn't. But that's not the only reason we're using Valgrind?
19:54 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: as you probably remarked, i recapped gregory's thoughts in the notes about pre-initialising with dummy values, but i need to re-watch the video with those caveats in mind
19:54 <michaelfolkson> Greg's comment here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17627#issuecomment-562387426
19:55 <michaelfolkson> And the video I'm referring to is here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I-XUHPimq3o
19:55 <michaelfolkson> From Jon's notes
19:55 <MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: no, we use valgrind for other checks as well (e.g. use-after-free, I believe)
19:55 <MarcoFalke> or whatever else valgrind checks for
19:56 <jonatack> the video went into which are the optimal dummy values for different types, and the question of pattern, random, fixed dummy vals
19:56 <jonatack> 3 minutes!
19:56 <jonatack> any last thoughts?
19:57 <MarcoFalke> So picking a constant as a random value is horribly wrong
19:57 <MarcoFalke> Picking a constant for a user preference (or similar) is less horrible, but still wrong
19:57 <michaelfolkson> Yup. That would surely apply to all software that relies on randomization not just Bitcoin
19:58 <michaelfolkson> Maybe I misunderstood the video but "always initialize local variables" seemed to be the advice
19:58 <MarcoFalke> It is not only about random values. Any value that is parsed/read/input from somewhere else (i.e. not the code)
19:59 <jonatack> OK let's wrap up. Feel free to continue after of course.
19:59 <jonatack> #action review this PR, ask questions, keep learning, keep sharpening your tools
19:59 <jonatack> #action see you next year!
19:59 <jonatack> #endmeeting
19:59 <michaelfolkson> OK cool. Many thanks jonatack and everyone else
20:00 <MarcoFalke> Thanks for hosting jonatack!
20:00 <michaelfolkson> Have a great Christmas :)
20:00 <MarcoFalke> Happy holidays everyone!
20:00 <jonatack> Thanks everyone, and ty to maintainers MarcoFalke and fanquake for joining us.
20:00 <emzy> Thanks and Happy holidays everyone!
20:01 <amiti> thanks all ! thanks for the notes & hosting jonatack
20:02 <jonatack> ty amiti :)
