---
layout: pr
title: "#16939 Delay querying DNS seeds if addrman is populated"
pr: 16939
components: [p2p]
authors: [ajtowns]
host: jnewbery
---

We will discuss both [PR 15558](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15558)
(merged) and [PR 16939](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16939) (open)
in this week's PR review club. Both are small code changes, so should be quick
to review.

## Notes

- When bitcoind is started, it tries to connect to peers from its addrman
  database. Those new connections are opened in
  `CConnman::ThreadOpenConnections()`, which is called in `CConnman::Start()`.
- If the addrman database is empty (for example, the first time that bitcoind
  is run), or if bitcoind is unable to successfully connect to two peers, then
  it will query DNS seeds to get addresses of candidate peers to connect to.
- Querying DNS seeds is done in a separate thread, `threadDNSAddressSeed`, which
  is also started in `CConman::Start()`.
- For completeness, if the DNS seed queries are unsuccesful, then bitcoind
  will fall back to connecting to a hard-coded list of seed nodes. This
  fall back functionality is only run as a last resort if all DNS seeds are
  down (eg if there is an attack on the DNS seed infrastructure).
- In February, [Issue 15434](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/15434) was
  opened, which reported that DNS seeds were being queried too soon and too
  frequently. From that issue: _"Despite being running most of the time, and
  having a database of tens of thousands of peers, my node seems to query the DNS
  seeds each time I restart it, which doesn't seem ideal from a privacy
  perspective"_.
- [PR 15558](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15558) (which was merged
  in time for V0.19) changed the `ThreadOpenConnections()` behaviour to only
  query three DNS seeds at a time (rather than all at once). According to the
  author: _"This reduces the amount of information DNS seeds can observe about the
  requesters by spreading the load over all of them."_.
- After that PR was merged, AJ Towns left [a
  comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15558#discussion_r327421987):
  _"I think there's a bug here: if this loop is hit with `addrman.size()==0` and
  `seeds_right_now==0` it will then query the first seed, and set
  `seeds_right_now==-1`, at which point this condition will keep failing on future
  loops, preventing a delay between batches of 3 seeds, and preventing early
  exit."_.
- [PR 16939](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16939) changes the DNS
  seed behaviour once again:
    - if there are 0 entries in addrman or `-forcedns` is set, it will query
      the DNS seeds immediately;
    - if there are fewer than 1000 entries in addrman, it will query DNS seeds
      after 11 seconds;
    - if there are more than 1000 entries in addrman, it will query DNS seeds
      after 5 minutes;
    - if there are still no entries in addrman 6 minutes after start up, then
      bitcoind will try to connect to the hard-coded seed nodes.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
(Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What steps did you take, beyond reading the code?

3. How would you test this manually? Could any automated tests be added?

4. Do you agree with [AJ's
   comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15558#discussion_r327421987)
   that this is a bug?

5. What implications do these PRs have for privacy? Robustness/redundancy?
   Usability?

6. Why was three DNS seeds chosen in [PR
   15558](*https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15558)?
