---
layout: pr
date: 2019-10-23
title: "#15934 Merge settings one place instead of five places"
pr: 15934
authors: [ryanofsky]
components: ["config"]
host: jnewbery
---

## Notes

- Bitcoin Core takes config from several places:
  1. A `bitcoin.conf` file in the data directory
  2. Command line arguments (when Bitcoin Core is started from the command line)
  3. QT settings (only for bitcoin-qt, not bitcoind or the utilities)
- Settings are also sometimes updated within the code. Usually this happens
  if some user-provided config implies other config. For example, if the
  user starts Bitcoin Core with `-connect` config to connect to specific peers,
  then by default `-listen` will be switched off, so the node won't accept
  incoming connections
  ([code](https://github.com/jnewbery/bitcoin/blob/40593ecc0bc48b22054da73eb4bdf1b3aeaedd4f/src/init.cpp#L784)).
  See `ForceSetArg()`, `SoftSetArg()` and `SoftSetBoolArg()` for other places
  where configuration is updated in the code.
- Since [PR 11862](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11862), the
  `bitcoin.conf` file has allowed network-specific sections. Different config
  can be specified for mainnet, testnet and regtest in the same config file by
  using section headings.
- QT settings are used for GUI-only persistent configuration. For example,
  the window location and whether the application is minimized to the tray is
  persisted between sessions in the QT settings. These settings are saved in the
  windows registry or platform specific config files.
- QT settings _also_ store application configuration that can be updated
  in the GUI, such as whether to prune or to use tor. This config is saved
  but is only applied when running bitcoin-qt, not when running bitcoind.
- Generally, QT settings override command-line arguments, which override
  `bitcoin.conf` configuration.
- There are a lot of quirks in the way that configuration is parsed and merged
  (eg command-line argument precedence is treated differently from config file
  precedence, some command-line arguments are ignored, etc). ryanofsky lists
  these quirks in the PR.
- [PR 15869](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15869) added test coverage
  for settings merging to prevent new code from introducing regressions.
- Several PRs are built on top of this:
  - [#15935: Add \<datadir\>/settings.json persistent settings storage](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15935)
  - [#15936: Unify bitcoin-qt and bitcoind persistent settings](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15936)
  - [#15937: Add loadwallet and createwallet load_on_startup options](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15937)

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
  NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
  (Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What steps did you take, beyond reading the code?

3. How easy did you find it to review the changes to `util/system` and
  `util/logging`? How about the test changes?

4. What is the univalue library, and how is it used in Bitcoin Core? How is it
  used in this PR? What are your thoughts about that?

5. [15935](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15935) adds a persistent
  read/write config file to the data directory. Have there been any other
  attempts to do this? Which do you prefer?
