---
layout: pr
date: 2019-11-06
title: "Fast rescan with BIP157 block filters"
pr: 15845
authors: [MarcoFalke]
components: ["wallet"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
---

## Notes

- [BIP 158](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0158.mediawiki)
  defines _compact block filters_: compact representations of data in a block.
- Compact block filters use Golomb-Rice coding for compression and can give a
  probabilistic answer to the question "does the block contain x?" There are no
  false negatives (if x is in the block, the answer will never be 'no'), but there are
  false positives (if x is not in the block, the answer may be 'yes'). The false
  positive rate is a parameter of the filter construction.
- BIP 158 also specifies one filter type called _Basic_ block filters, which
  encode the scriptPubKeys of all the UTXOs spent in the block, and the
  scriptPubKeys of all the new UTXOs created in the block.
- [PR 12254](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12254) implemented compact
  block filters in Bitcoin Core, and [PR
  14121](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/14121) added a new index, which
  stores the compact block filters for blocks that have been validated.
- When rescanning, the wallet wants to know whether there are any transactions
  that send outputs to addresses it owns or spends those outputs.
  Currently rescan is done by [iterating through every transaction in every
  block](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6a7c40bee403cadedeecd4b1c6528575522094eb/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L1611-L1613)
  (from the rescan start point).
- Rescanning the entire block chain can typically take half an hour or more.
- This PR changes the rescan logic to first compute a Golomb-Coded Set of all
  the wallet's scripts, and then tests for matches against all blocks in
  the block chain. Only blocks with a positive match need to be fetched and
  scanned by the wallet.
- This functionality can only be used if a compact block filter index has been
  constructed by the node. Use the `-blockfilterindex=1` argument.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
  NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
  (Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What steps did you take, beyond reading the code?

3. How many scripts will a newly created wallet have? How many items will be
   added to the GCS returned by `GetAllRelevantScriptPubKeys()`?

4. What is the false positive rate for Basic compact block filters? How many
   false positive blocks would you expect a newly created block to retrieve if
   scanning the entire block-chain? (note that newly created keys have _birthdays_
   which mean they don't actually have to scan before the key was generated).

5. What do you think of the new tests? Would you add any additional test cases?

## Meeting Log

12:00 <@jnewbery> #startmeeting
12:00 <@jnewbery> hi!
12:00 < jonatack> hi
12:00 < amiti> hi
12:00 < pinheadmz> Hi!
12:00 <@jnewbery> Hi all. This week's PR is 15845: "Fast rescan with BIP157 block filters". Notes and questions at https://bitcoincore.reviews/15845.html.
12:00 <@jnewbery> Before we start, I wanted to give a couple of tips for using IRC here.
12:01 <@jnewbery> First: jump right in! I'll prompt the conversation with the questions at https://bitcoincore.reviews/15845.html, but don't feel like you need to wait until after those questions to make your comment or ask your question.
12:01 < lightlike> hi
12:01 < michaelfolkson> Hey
12:01 < jonatack> #topic irc tips :p
12:01 <@jnewbery> You're not being rude if I ask a question and you make an unrelated comment!
12:01 <@jnewbery> We can have multiple threads going at the same time. If it gets too confusing I might step in and ask people to address one topic first, but in general just go for it.
12:02 <@jnewbery> Second: don't ask to ask questions. There's no need to say things like "I have a question that I think might be off topic" or "is it ok if I ask my question now?". Just jump right in and ask. If it's off-topic, then people will tell you!
12:02 <@jnewbery> ok, that's it for now. Let's get started!
12:02 <@jnewbery> What did everyone think of the PR?
12:02 < provoostenator> (hi)
12:02 <@jnewbery>  Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK? 
12:02 < provoostenator> It's fast!
12:03 < provoostenator> It's increased my sanity :-)
12:03 < pinheadmz> Conceptually very cool use case and makes a lot of sense. Rescanning is terrible and this is a huge improvement
12:03 < jonatack> Tested ACK review underway.
12:03 < jkczyz_> hi
12:04 <@jnewbery> great! Everyone seems happy with the concept at least. What did you all do to review and test?
12:04 < pinheadmz> Also reveals how a full neutrino client would work
12:04 -!- Irssi: #bitcoin-core-pr-reviews: Total of 78 nicks [1 ops, 0 halfops, 0 voices, 77 normal]
12:04 < provoostenator> I mostly tested it by scanning old wallets.
12:04 < pinheadmz> Just read the code. Didn't have time to install before the meeting
12:04 < provoostenator> Also briefly read the code
12:05 <@jnewbery> did people have a chance to read BIP 158? It's not as scary as you might think
12:05 < jkczyz_> yep
12:05 < jonatack> Built, ran all tests, read code, now poking through the tests, would want to test against wallets too.
12:06 < pinheadmz> Yes and we merged bip158 filters into bcoin recently as well
12:07 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: great. Are you serving compact block filters over p2p yet?
12:07 < pinheadmz> No :-)
12:07 < pinheadmz> Just indexing and rpc
12:07 < pinheadmz> P2P service is coming
12:07 < emilengler> Hi
12:07 <@jnewbery> Was anyone able to answer q3: How many scripts will a newly created wallet have? How many items will be added to the GCS returned by GetAllRelevantScriptPubKeys()?
12:07 < molz> I compiled PR 15845 for windows and i'm running it now but i don't see anything different, do I need to put something in bitcoin.conf?
12:08 <@jnewbery> molz: you'll need to use -blockfilterindex=1 to build the index
12:08 < provoostenator> FYI: p2p is here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16442
12:08 < molz> jnewbery, ah i see, thanks for that tip
12:08 < MarcoFalke> molz: There is no user facing change (other than less time spent rescanning)
12:09 <@jnewbery> Thanks provoostenator. I think we should cover that in a future PR review club. Anyone want to host that one? :)
12:09 < molz> im so used to running btcd where i don't need to put any flag for the filters in .conf, thanks
12:09 < provoostenator> Yeah, that's a fun one, and you can test it against btcd (which I did, and found some issues) and other clients.
12:09 < sebastianvstaa> jnewberry: how is -blockfilterindex=! different from -rescan?
12:10 <@jnewbery> blockfilterindex=1 builds the index in the background. -rescan=1 rescans the blockchain for all wallet transactions on startup
12:10 < sebastianvstaa> *blockfilterindex=1
12:10 < sebastianvstaa> ok
12:10 < provoostenator> You can also rescan using RPC, e.g. rescanblockchain FROMHEIGHT
12:11 <@jnewbery> there should be no user-facing difference running with -rescan before and after this change, except it should be _a lot_ faster after this PR
12:11 < molz> so if you didn't start the node with -blockfilterindex=1, do you have to delete 'blocks' and 'chainstate' and start over?
12:11 < sebastianvstaa> yes. on testnet it'S only 10 seconds or so now.
12:11 < provoostenator> molz: no
12:11 < molz> oh ok, provoostenator
12:11 < provoostenator> There's a new indexing system, thanks to Jimpo,
12:12 <@jnewbery> The code changes in this PR are quite small, but I think you need to understand keypools and how the wallet rescans to give it a good review
12:12 < provoostenator> Which lets you add and remove indexes without having to do a chainstate / block reindex.
12:12 < provoostenator> You can even temporarliy turn an index off.
12:13 < provoostenator> My biggest worry would be that somehow we miss some weird transaction type during the rescan. But that would (?) imply a bug in the filter definitions.
12:14 < MarcoFalke> provoostenator: Or a bug in GetAllRelevantScriptPubKeys
12:14 < Talkless> hi
12:14 < Talkless> "This PR changes the rescan logic to first compute a Golomb-Coded Set of all the wallet’s scripts, and then tests for matches against all blocks in the block chain. Only blocks with a positive match need to be fetched and scanned by the wallet."
12:14 < Talkless> does that mean bitcoin core wallet will use these filters by itself?
12:14 <@jnewbery> provoostenator: yes, the thing that reviewers should be asking themselves is "could rescan miss a wallet transaction with this new code"
12:14 < provoostenator> Talkless: what do you mean by "by itself"?
12:14 < Talkless> not via peer services by other wallets
12:15 < MarcoFalke> Talkless: No, the filters are handled by the node, which computes the result and hands it to the wallet
12:15 < provoostenator> Talkless: correct: the node generates the filters by scanning the chain.
12:15 <@jnewbery> Talkless: There are no p2p changes in this PR
12:15 < Talkless> jnewbery: I uderstand
12:16 < pinheadmz> Did bloom filters include OPRETURN data? I think bip158 does not right?
12:16 < MarcoFalke> Talkless: I think "node" might be a better word for network connections, not "wallet"
12:16 < Talkless> but the intention is that these filters will be used only by "other" external wallets via p2p, or by bitcoin core's wallet itself/
12:16 <@jnewbery> The wallet keypool is defined here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/scriptpubkeyman.h#L86
12:16 <@jnewbery> (moved from wallet.h very recently)
12:16 < Talkless> "This PR changes the rescan logic to first compute a Golomb-Coded Set of all the wallet’s scripts"
12:16 < Talkless> for ALL WALLET'S SRIPTS?
12:16 < Talkless> for the wallet that resided in this current node?
12:17 <@jnewbery> That class has a very full comment
12:17 < MarcoFalke> Talkless: for the wallet that is loaded currently
12:17 < MarcoFalke> The scripts are different for each wallet (in general)
12:17 < Talkless> MarcoFalke: ok so the node will use these filters for active wallets in that node? That's what I wanted to make clear.
12:18 <@jnewbery> This part is important: "The keypool is used to implement a 'gap limit'. The keypool maintains a set of keys (by default 1000) ahead of the last used key and scans for the addresses of those keys."
12:18 <@jnewbery> so how many scripts does a newly created wallet have?
12:18 < pinheadmz> Sounds like 1000 ;-)
12:18 < pinheadmz> Oh unless we also add nested scripts
12:18 < molz> 6000? :D
12:19 <@jnewbery> molz: Yes!
12:19 <@jnewbery> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15845#issuecomment-485167872
12:19 < provoostenator> Keypool is not the only thing we care about. There can also be watch-only things. But not OP_RETURN afaik.
12:19 < molz> i cheat i cheat, i read what sipa said lol
12:19 <@jnewbery> reading what sipa says is generally encouraged
12:20 <@jnewbery> ok, so when we rescan an empty wallet, we're initially looking out for 6000 different scripts
12:20 <@jnewbery> in the current code, what happens when we match one of those scripts?
12:22 < jkczyz_> We lookup the block to see if it's really there
12:22 < provoostenator> 6000 scripts leads to a lot of false positives.
12:22 <@jnewbery> jkczyz_: I think you're referring to what happens after this PR
12:22 <@jnewbery> I meant in the master (pre-PR) code
12:23 < jkczyz_> haha, yeah I guess that's what you meant by currently :P
12:23 <@jnewbery> sorry - my question was unclear
12:23 <@jnewbery> heres the code in master: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L1575
12:24 <@jnewbery> SyncTransaction() is where the magic happens: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L1628
12:25 <@jnewbery> Does anyone want to guess? :)
12:25 <@jnewbery> what do you think we want to do when we find a matching scriptPubKey for a key that is in our keypool in a block transaction?
12:26 < jkczyz_> update our balance
12:26 < pinheadmz> Yeah add the utxo to wallet db
12:26 <@jnewbery> jkczyz_: good guess! We actually calculate balance dynamically whenever it's needed. We don't keep a running total
12:26 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: yes!
12:27 < pinheadmz> (Or remove if we were spending!)
12:27 < ajonas> AddToWalletIfInvolvingMe
12:27 <@jnewbery> ajonas: \o/
12:27 <@jnewbery> ok, so we see a transaction that we're interested in, and then add it to the wallet
12:28 <@jnewbery> what else do we need to do? Think about the keypool
12:28 < amiti> mark the keys as used
12:28 < amiti> aka remove from keypool
12:28 < pinheadmz> And generate one to replace?
12:28 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: we don't really 'remove' transactions from the wallet. If they send to us or spend from us, then we want to keep track of them
12:29 <@jnewbery> amiti and pinheadmz: yes and yes :) :)
12:29 < pinheadmz> So does this actually mean that the lookahead is 1000?
12:29 < pinheadmz> In the context of bip44
12:29 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: correct
12:29 < molz> the keypool would be smaller until we use up 1000 keys then the keypool would generate another 1000?
12:29 < pinheadmz> Interesting. The bip only specifies 20 I think
12:29 < provoostenator> 1000 receive + 1000 change I think
12:30 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: see earlier comment: "The keypool is used to implement a 'gap limit'. The keypool maintains a set of keys (by default 1000) ahead of the last used key and scans for the addresses of those keys."
12:30 < provoostenator> BIP 44 specifies a GAP limit of 20, but we don't use BIP 44.
12:30 < pinheadmz> I see
12:30 <@jnewbery> molz: no, we top up as we go. So if we drop to 999, we'll generate another 1
12:30 <@jnewbery> as long as the wallet is unlocked (not encrypted)
12:30 < ajonas> why do we need so many?
12:30 < provoostenator> With descriptor wallets it'll be 6000: 1000 for each address type, adn then receve+ change
12:31 < provoostenator> ajonas: I think it's historical, before we had HD wallets it would pre-generate private keys
12:31 < MarcoFalke> ajonas: I think it was bumped when we switched to hd wallets
12:31 < jonatack> To avoid loss of funds iirc
12:31 < provoostenator> I started with 100 I think: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/4323bfeafda4a5e0101710d94b518d41819a2325
12:32 <@jnewbery> sorry, was just looking at the code, trying to find where we top up the key pool
12:32 <@jnewbery> it's changed around recently
12:32 <@jnewbery> here we are: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L885
12:33 <@jnewbery> in AddToWalletIfInvolvingMe(), we'll mark the keypool keys as used there ^
12:33 < provoostenator> And bumbed to 1000 here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/commit/41dc1635878766e4a810e6a7c57637d079fced64 (indeed after HD)
12:33 <@jnewbery> And MarkUnusedAddresses() calls TopUp(): https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/scriptpubkeyman.cpp#L283
12:33 <@jnewbery> L294 in that function
12:36 <@jnewbery> ok, so let's recap: a freshly created wallet will have 1000 keys (which equates to 6000 scriptPubKeys). In master, on rescan, we'll iterate through the blocks in the block chain. If we find a transaction that matches one of those scriptPubKeys, we'll mark that keypool entry (and every keypool entry before it) as used...
12:36 <@jnewbery> ... and then topup the keypool before continuing to scan the blockchain
12:36 <@jnewbery> so, if keys are used in order then we won't miss any transactions
12:37 <@jnewbery> the gap limit of 1000 means that if there are any gaps, or the keys are used out-of-order, then as long as the gap is less than 1000, we won't miss any transactions
12:37 <@jnewbery> slight correction - we have 2000 keys and 6000 scriptPubKeys (1000 external keys for handing out as addresses, 1000 internal keys for change)
12:38 <@jnewbery> any questions about any of that ^ ?
12:38 < pinheadmz> 👍
12:39 < amiti> does the ordering / gap limit only apply to the keys handed out as addresses?
12:39 <@jnewbery> amiti: good question! You're asking because you have complete control over change keys so you wouldn't leave gaps?
12:39 < amiti> yeah
12:40 <@jnewbery> I think there may be circumstances where you'd have gaps in your change keys, but it's less likely than with giving out addresses (where someone might just not pay you)
12:40 < amiti> although I guess you could form txns at different fee rates that get mined at different times and are thus seen on the chain out of order?
12:41 <@jnewbery> yes, true
12:41 < amiti> yeah I was wondering that... what happens in that case?
12:41 <@jnewbery> and if you RBF bump, then you use a new key for change I think
12:41 < jonatack> MarcoFalke: in commit faf7cc8 updating wallet_import_rescan.py::134, I was wondering, why is "rescan" changed to "expect_rescan" in ImportNode?
12:42 <@jnewbery> the logic in the core wallet is the same for both. We have a gap limit of 1000. Perhaps it could be reduced for internal keys
12:42 < jonatack> MarcoFalke: ImportNode = collections.namedtuple("ImportNode", "prune expect_rescan blockfilter")
12:42 <@jnewbery> has anyone spotted the bug in this PR yet? :)
12:42 <@jnewbery> (I've been giving you hints by talking about the keypool)
12:44 <@jnewbery> hint: why is important that TopUp() is called in the rescan loop?
12:45 < amiti> TopUpKeyPool()? or is there a different function TopUp() that I'm missing?
12:46 < jkczyz> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/scriptpubkeyman.cpp#L1033
12:46 < amiti> ah thanks
12:46 <@jnewbery> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/976cc766c42889b6d1042e4cda39045d5001f406/src/wallet/scriptpubkeyman.cpp#L293
12:46 <@jnewbery> that's where it's called from AddToWalletIfInvolvingMe()
12:47 <@jnewbery> what happens if you create a wallet, make a backup, then receive 1001 payments, and then try to restore from that backup?
12:48 < molz> one of them isn't in the backup
12:48 < pinheadmz> Are we not topping up every time a key is found in a block during rescan?
12:48 <@jnewbery> molz: none of the transactions are in the backup. The initial 1000 keys are in the backup
12:48 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: you're getting close
12:48 < molz> so currently core wallet has deterministic backup so if we make a backup at the start of the wallet, it will automatically backup all our keys by the TopUp call?
12:49 <@jnewbery> molz: yes, the keys are deterministic, so when topping up the backup, you'll get the same new keypool keys
12:49 < molz> ah
12:49 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: in the new PR15845 logic, what are we matching the blocks against?
12:50 < pinheadmz> GetAllRelevantScriptPubKeys()
12:50 <@jnewbery> which returns a GCS filter
12:50 <@jnewbery> and where is that filter built?
12:50 < jkczyz> So the filter needs to be updated?
12:50 <@jnewbery> jkczyq: \o/
12:50 < pinheadmz> \o/ haha
12:51 < pinheadmz> I should've guessed that!
12:51 <@jnewbery> GetAllRelevantScriptPubKeys() is only called _once_, outside the rescan loop
12:51 <@jnewbery> that means as we advance through the blockchain, then it doesn't get updated
12:51 < pinheadmz> In bcoin we use internal bloom filters this same way, and in some cases the filter is not updated fast enough between blocks
12:52 < pinheadmz> But the filter comes from each block. So it's not the filter that needs to be updated it's the element list of keys to match against right?
12:53 < jkczyz> GCSFilter::ElementSet
12:53 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: i'm not entirely sure what the right terminology is. The GCS is what the wallet creates to match against the block filter
12:53 < amiti> ah looks like ryanofsky changed it from TopUpKeyPool() to TopUp() yesterday, and I hadn't pulled the recent changed https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17381/commits/491a599b37f3e3a648e52aebed677ca11b0615e2
12:54 <@jnewbery> From this comment, I think that an earlier version of the PR might have recalculated the GCS for each block: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15845#issuecomment-491539541
12:55 < pinheadmz> Hm but conceptually, the filter is derived once the block is verified and the filter for each block doesn't get changed or updated ?
12:55 <@jnewbery> which fixes this bug but is slow
12:55 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: correct. The block filter doesn't ever change
12:56 <@jnewbery> 5 minutes left. Did anyont take a look at false-positive rates?
12:58 < pinheadmz> 😬
12:58 < jonatack> Any links on this apart from jimpo's comment? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15845#pullrequestreview-228848610
12:58 < ajonas> supposed to be 1/M right? and M is a param here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12254/files#diff-e18b8a63a6ebd2d9ceedf323fd3a4861R77
12:58 <@jnewbery> ajonas: yes
12:58 < michaelfolkson> What's the latest update of BIP 157/158 in Core? I found this useful resource from some random called <@jnewbery> on StackExchange :) https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/86231/whats-the-distinction-between-bip-157-and-bip-158-are-they-supported-by-bitcoi
12:59 < michaelfolkson> There's still contention on serving filters right?
12:59 <@jnewbery> M is specified here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0158.mediawiki#block-filters
12:59 < provoostenator> jnewbery: nice catch!
12:59 <@jnewbery> so a transaction that isn't in a block will return positive with probability 1/784931
13:01 <@jnewbery> I think that means that a full keypool of addresses will return positive with a probability of (1 - (784930/784931)^6000)
13:01 <@jnewbery> which I think is ~ 6000/784931
13:02 < ajonas> for those smarter than me Sipa has a write up on the optimization: https://gist.github.com/sipa/576d5f09c3b86c3b1b75598d799fc845
13:02 < jonatack> Interesting catch! We're missing tests that aren't seeing this bug, it would seem.
13:02 <@jnewbery> jonatack: it'd require a wallet with lots of transactions
13:02 <@jnewbery> the current import-rescan test doesn't have enough transactions to hit keypool topup issues
13:03 < jonatack> Chris Stewart, who has an open PR to add many property-based tests, was suggesting that BIP157/158 might be a fruitful area for rapidcheck testing.
13:03 <@jnewbery> We're over time, but I can go for a few more minutes if people have more questions
13:03 < pinheadmz> jnewbery: thanks again as always!!!
13:04 < jonatack> jnewbery: how did you catch this... code review?
13:05 <@jnewbery> jonatack: I implemented this PR a couple of years ago: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11022 so I know what sharp corners to look out for :)
13:06 < ysangkok> thanks!  awesome when there is a known bug that people have to find! so dramatic
13:06 < pinheadmz> Whoa was that with bip158 filters? A couple of years ago?
13:06 <@jnewbery> pinheadmz: no, just regular good old fashioned rescans
13:06 < pinheadmz> Ah
13:07 <@jnewbery> ok, let's call time there
13:07 <@jnewbery> Thanks everyone. Fun meeting today!
13:07 <@jnewbery> #endmeeting
13:07 < jonatack> Nice :) and it was not caught yet in the review until now. Really good session.
13:07 < michaelfolkson> Thanks, fascinating
13:07 < molz> so the bug is not related to the filters?
13:07 < amiti> thanks !
13:07 < jonatack> Thanks!
13:08 <@jnewbery> I spotted it when I reviewed it last week but didn't want to spoil the fun for you all :)
13:08 < provoostenator> jonatack jnewbery keypool size on regtest is tiny (10?), so should be easy to test this
13:08 < jonatack> jnewbery: nice one
13:08 < jonatack> provoostenator: oh interesting
13:09 < molz> would it be better if the keypool is smaller ? like 500 keys?
13:09 <@jnewbery> I'll try to get notes and questions up before the weekend. Please ping me if you want to host. I think lots of you are ready.
13:09 <@jnewbery> I'm happy to help you prepare and help with notes and questions
13:10 <@jnewbery> molz: I think 1000 is too large for most people. gmax disagrees: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15845#issuecomment-485160938
13:11 < molz> jnewbery, yea i was around the bitcoin channels when this was changed, i think because many business owners lost funds thinking if they backup once (100 keypool then) then the rest of their money was backed up
13:11 <@jnewbery> oh. One more thing
13:11 <@jnewbery> It turns out 17:00 UTC isn't ideal for me now that daylight savings is over
13:11 < jonatack> Same
13:12 < sebastianvstaa> same :)
13:12 <@jnewbery> would changing it to 18:00 preclude anyone from joining us?
13:12 < purposely> Not an issue for you,  Maybe a poll would help
13:13 < purposely> not an issue for me*
13:13 < provoostenator> molz: a potential followup to make it snappier, is to have two scan passes. One with very small lookahead window, and then one with a bigger window just in case.
13:13 < molz> provoostenator, how do you do this in core?
13:13 <@jnewbery> let me know if 18:00 doesn't work for you. If I don't hear from anyone, I'll update the website to say 18:00 this weekend
13:14 < provoostenator> I even thought about adding a wallet based cache to the REST address lookup API, which could do a just-in-time rescan. Then you wouldn't need electrum server :-)
13:14 < jonatack> jnewbery: yes, i'd say change it, communicate it well, and see if anyone complains
13:14 < provoostenator> (reckless idea, but still)
13:14 < purposely> if time changes, let's by loud about changing the time
13:14 <@jnewbery> I'm not going to do a poll. Just let me know if 18:00 doesn't work
13:16 < molz> jnewbery, thanks for doing this for us, I've been lurking until today, you've been doing a wonderful job, i really enjoy reading the convo and it helps me learn :D
13:17 < lightlike> 18:00 is much better for me as well.
13:17 <@jnewbery> molz: thanks. Glad you're taking a more active part now!
13:17 <@jnewbery> I enjoy doing these. I think it's a really good way for us all to learn from each other
13:19 <@jnewbery> I would really like it if I could convince more of you to host. I think having to host makes you really understand the PR and it's a great way to learn.
13:19 <@jnewbery> (but I understand most of you are doing this in your free time, and it's a big ask)
13:19 < jonatack> +1 for a great way to learn
13:19 < MarcoFalke> +1
13:19 < MarcoFalke> This one was eye-opening
13:19 < sebastianvstaa> +1
