---
layout: pr
date: 2020-12-02
title: "Apply strict verification flags for transaction tests and assert backwards compatibility"
pr: 19698
authors: [glozow]
components: ["tests", "consensus"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: 110239f
---

## Notes

* Bitcoin script allows users to attach spending conditions to transaction
  outputs. A “locking” script in a transaction output specifies some spending
  condition, such as providing a public key that hashes to a specified digest and
  a valid signature for that public key. An “unlocking” script in a transaction
  input supplies the operations and/or data to satisfy that condition.
  Transaction validation includes interpreting these scripts and running their
  specified operations such as verifying signatures, hashing data, checking
  timestamps, etc.

* The Bitcoin script
  [interpreter](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2ee954da/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L431)
  includes code that understands all types of scripts and accepts [script
  verification
  flags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2ee954da/src/script/interpreter.h#L36-L41)
  to adjust which rules to enforce. Determining which flags to apply is very
  important.

  - Example 1: When a node validates a block, it determines what the
    consensus rules are (see
    [GetBlockScriptFlags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/04670ef8/src/validation.cpp#L1822),
    which also serves as a little tour of Bitcoin consensus history) before
    validation. During Initial sync, the consensus rules to apply will change
    as the block chain advances.

  - Example 2: Bitcoin Core nodes also enforce
    [policy](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/tree/master/src/policy) (or
    “standardness”) rules in addition to consensus rules when accepting transactions
    into their mempool by applying [additional script verification
    flags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2ee954da/src/policy/policy.h#L58).

  - The `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADEABLE_NOPS` policy flag prevents a
    node from accepting a transaction into its mempool if that transaction uses
    an upgradeable OP_NOP.  During activation for `CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY`, for
    example, an in-mempool transaction using NOP2 could have been invalidated
    between blocks.  “Discouraging” transactions in this way is preferable to
    re-validating all transactions in the mempool after every block.

  - PR [#10699](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10699) describes a
    procedure for adding new consensus rules via upgradable NOPs or witness
    versions which incorporates this idea.

* PR [#10699](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10699) established the precedent
  that all script verification flags must be soft forks, i.e. more script
  verification flags = more strict spending rules.

* PR [#19698](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698) extends the
  current transaction unit tests by asserting that each test applies flags
  precisely by asserting an opposite result when flags are removed or added. The
  goal is to ensure that valid transaction tests don't pass due to a lack of
  flags and invalid transaction tests don't fail due to an excess of flags.

## Questions

1. What is the difference between `PolicyScriptChecks` and
   `ConsensusScriptChecks`?

2. Since the code for taproot is already in interpreter.cpp, why aren't taproot
   rules being enforced yet (what condition in the code would it exit on)? How
   would we invoke `VerifyWitnessProgram` to make it apply taproot spending rules?

3. This PR edits some of the
   [CheckLockTimeVerify](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698/files#diff-7e4229911841f1d419c71a0d0df95feb07b77f90c0ff39f09182eb8ca50779b9L196)
   tests by removing the `1` (push a 1 to the stack) at the end of the scripts.
   However, it doesn't do this for all of them
   ([example](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698/files#diff-7e4229911841f1d419c71a0d0df95feb07b77f90c0ff39f09182eb8ca50779b9L199)).
   Why? (Hint: try removing it and running the transaction tests,
   `src/test/test_bitcoin --log_level=all --run_test=transaction_tests`)

4. What does
   [TrimFlags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/110239f2/src/test/transaction_tests.cpp#L138-L148)
   do?

5. What does it mean for script verify flags to be “minimal” and “maximal?”

6. How do the tests check that valid transaction tests have maximal/minimal
   flags?

7. What does it mean for script verify flags to be “soft forks?” How do the
   tests check this?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:57 <glozow>   ____        ____     ____                      ____      _____
17:57 <glozow>  / __"| u  U /"___| U |  _"\ u       ___       U|  _"\ u  |_ " _| 🏴‍☠️
17:57 <glozow> <\___ \/   \| |      \| |_) |/      |_"_|      \| |_) |/    | |__/
17:58 <glozow>  u___) |    | |___    |  _ <         | |        |  __/     /| |
17:58 <glozow>  |____/>>    \____|   |_| \_\      U/| |\U      |_|       u |_|
17:58 <glozow>   ))  (__)   // \\    //   \\_  .-,_|___|_,-.   ||>>_     _// \\_
17:58 <glozow>  (__)       (__)(__) (__)  (__)  \_)-' '-(_/   (__)__)   (__) (__)
17:58 <glozow> (in 2 minutes)
17:58 <jnewbery> \o/
17:59 <MarcoFalke> I think I am using the wrong IRC client to see ascii art
17:59 <willcl_ark> very nifty
18:00 <jnewbery> #startmeeting
18:00 <sequel> fixed width font helps
18:00 <MarcoFalke> copy-paste in vim helped :)
18:00 <glozow> hi everyone!
18:00 <willcl_ark> hi
18:00 <sequel> hi
18:00 <robot-dreams> hi
18:00 <MarcoFalke> hi
18:00 <elle> hi!
18:00 <mango> hi
18:00 <thomasb06> hi
18:00 <dhruvm> hi
18:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
18:00 <schulzemic> hi
18:00 <emzy> hi
18:00 <jnewbery> hi all. Welcome to review club! Feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
18:00 <cangr> hi
18:00 <jnewbery> anyone here for the first time?
18:01 <schulzemic> yes
18:01 <glozow> Welcome schulzemic! ☜(ﾟヮﾟ☜)
18:01 <emzy> MarcoFalke: hehe, that was what I also did.
18:01 <sequel> welcome schulzemic
18:01 <murch> hi
18:01 <cangr> yes
18:01 <jnewbery> welcome schulzemic :)
18:01 <schulzemic> Thanks!
18:01 <jnewbery> glozow is hosting today, but I just wanted to mention something first
18:01 <jnewbery> I'm currently looking for hosts for future review club meetings.
18:02 <jnewbery> I've got a lot of commitments right now, so anyone volunteering to host would be really helping me!
18:02 <jnewbery> I can help you prepare/review notes and questions, and help you get ready for the meeting.
18:02 <jnewbery> If you've been coming to the meetings for a few weeks/months, then you're ready to host! Take a look at all the people who've hosted before you here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/meetings-hosts/.
18:02 <jnewbery> I find that teaching something is one of the best ways of learning. Hosting a review club will force you to understand the PR that week. So if you're serious about improving your understanding of Bitcoin Core, then I'd highly recommend hosting a review club.
18:02 <jnewbery> Feel free to message me after the meeting in this channel or privately.
18:03 <jnewbery> ok, over to glozow for the fun part..
18:03 <glozow> woo thanks jnewbery! Today we’re talking about PR #19698 https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698
18:03 <robot-dreams> Welcome cangr and thanks jnewbery!
18:03 <glozow> Did anyone get the chance to review the PR? (y/n)
18:03 <anir> y
18:03 <jnewbery> y
18:03 <willcl_ark> y
18:03 <elle> y
18:03 <thomasb06> y
18:03 <glozow> (☞ﾟヮﾟ)☞ cangr welcome!
18:03 <robot-dreams> y-ish but want to take a closer look after the  meeting
18:04 <murch> y
18:04 <cangr> thanks
18:04 <emzy> y (reading it and running make check)
18:04 <glozow> I just hope that everyone learns something, so feel free to ask any questions :) a lot of the questions today are also more conceptual than implementation
18:04 <glozow> Let’s get this party started! First warm-up question: What is the difference between `PolicyScriptChecks` and `ConsensusScriptChecks`?
18:05 <willcl_ark> As I understand it, policies are soft local rules regarding what our node will create and accept. Consensus rules by contrast are hard limits which define what we accept as valid transactions and blocks on the network.
18:05 <glozow> link to code btw: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a35b948836db20fab9b48d3b77cf9f23ffee109a/src/validation.cpp#L924
18:05 <pinheadmz> policy is the ruleset that validates entry into the mempool, consensus is the ruleset that validates entry into blocks -- confusing but mempool rules are always *more* restrictive!
18:05 <thomasb06> PolicyScriptChecks is executed first, and ConsensusScriptChecks only checks if the script doesn't pass because of flags
18:06 <dhruvm> Policy is the prerogative of the node, Consensus is what the network expects and considers honest.
18:06 <willcl_ark> and we use policy checks as a "cheap" DOS prevention before running expensive? consensus checks
18:06 <glozow> willcl_ark pinheadmz dhruvm correct about policy vs consensus! can anyone tell me what the differences are in the code?
18:06 <sequel> policy screens on the node level, consensus on the network level (should never make it into the chain)
18:07 <michaelfolkson> If a transaction doesn't follow consensus rules then it would fork the chain if included a block
18:07 <glozow> willcl_ark not really, they are both script checks and aren't that different in terms of computational complexity
18:07 <sipa> sdaftuar just wrote a great answer on this question: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/100317/what-is-the-difference-between-policy-and-consensus-when-it-comes-to-a-bitcoin-c
18:08 <glozow> sipa: that's an awesome post
18:08 <michaelfolkson> That was amazing. Thanks for that sdaftuar
18:08 <pinheadmz> in the code, there are bitfields like this one https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a35b948836db20fab9b48d3b77cf9f23ffee109a/src/policy/policy.h#L60 that define a set of rules to check
18:08 <sipa> glozow: it depends, i think
18:08 <willcl_ark> sipa: oh wow that is a nice answer
18:09 <sipa> some policy checks (specifically resource limit related ones, size of scripts, ...) let us avoid doing signature checks before it's needed
18:09 <sipa> policy is really a whole bunch of unrelated things
18:09 <glozow> ah that's true
18:09 <glozow> most of those are in PreChecks though, I believe
18:10 <murch> Policy checks only apply to unconfirmed transactinos, though, right?
18:10 <MarcoFalke> (mempool) policy even includes non-script reject reasons like tx dependencies
18:10 <michaelfolkson> And so we try to do checks from cheapest to most expensive in that order?
18:10 <pinheadmz> and IIRC sipa, for soft forks the rules apply to the mempool (policy) before the actual soft fork activation. Does that hold true for taproot? For example with the next release of bitcoind, taproot rules will actually apply in the mempool even though they are not enforced in blocks yet?
18:10 <sipa> glozow: oh, this is just about the script validation flags for policy? in that case you're right
18:10 <glozow> what I wanted to get to was `PolicyScriptChecks` and `ConsensusScriptChecks` both call `CheckInputScripts`, but with different script verification flags :)
18:10 <MarcoFalke> murch: yes
18:10 <robot-dreams> One question about the the code difference, why does Consensus use CheckInputsFromMempoolAndCache?
18:11 <pinheadmz> actually answer my own question: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a35b948836db20fab9b48d3b77cf9f23ffee109a/src/policy/policy.h#L76
18:11 <sipa> pinheadmz: actually, no: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20165
18:13 <murch> Hehe, is everyone busy reading Suhas's post or why did we stop? :D
18:13 <glozow> robot-dreams: I think it's to use cached coins or signature verification result, I'd have to check more closely
18:13 <glozow> ok yes, next question: Since the code for taproot is already in interpreter.cpp, why aren’t taproot rules being enforced yet (what condition in the code would it exit on)? How would we invoke `VerifyWitnessProgram` to make it apply taproot spending rules?
18:13 <glozow> Code we’re looking at: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2ee954daaee5758d04935492139808cb6fd95233/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1885-L1926
18:14 <thomasb06> (ko)
18:15 <pinheadmz> well this is interesting, because if you look at SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT -- it is included in the standard verify flags in the code i posted, but then those txs are actually not relayed because of the code sipa posted -- right?
18:15 <willcl_ark> Looks like a Taproot tx would currently fail at src/validation.cpp#MemPoolAccept::PreChecks#L696
18:15 <jnewbery> robot-dreams: that's an excellent question. There's a comment here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a35b948836db20fab9b48d3b77cf9f23ffee109a/src/validation.cpp#L959-L975 that explains why that function is being called
18:16 <willcl_ark> We should call VerifyWitnessProgram with `witversion=1` to make it apply taproot rules
18:17 <robot-dreams> I'm guessing a taproot transaction would not make it into the mempool due to the policy flag `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION`
18:18 <sipa> no, that's for unknown leaf versions
18:18 <sipa> the only defined leaf version is 0xc0 for tapscript currently
18:19 <glozow> is there a condition within that control block that would exit early if we... say... didn't have a script verification flag set? :P
18:19 <elle> im assuming that the SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT bit is not yet added to the flags variable. Meaning that this line is false:     if (VersionBitsState(pindex->pprev, consensusparams, Consensus::DEPLOYMENT_TAPROOT, versionbitscache) == ThresholdState::ACTIVE) {
18:20 <elle> (https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/validation.cpp#L1861)
18:20 <glozow> elle: ding ding ding!!! winner winner
18:20 <glozow> today is all about script verification flags, in case y'all haven't noticed :)
18:20 <pinheadmz> well but isnt it included in standard flags? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a35b948836db20fab9b48d3b77cf9f23ffee109a/src/policy/policy.h#L76
18:21 <glozow> not consensus
18:21 <pinheadmz> aha, missed the context :-P
18:22 <glozow> and as elle pointed out, whenever we validate blocks, we get our consensus rules in the form of flags in `GetBlockScriptFlags`: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/04670ef81ea2300fcba4e1a492c4c6b0e0752848/src/validation.cpp#L1822
18:22 <glozow> okie dokie
18:22 <sipa> in the mempool, taproot script validation currently happens in 0.21... except that as long as it isn't active on the network, a pre-script policy check will reject it before the script interpreter even runs
18:22 <glozow> Let’s dive into the test JSON files :D This PR edits some of the CTV and CSV tests by removing the `1` (push a 1 to the stack) at the end of the scripts. However, it doesn’t do this for all of them. Why?
18:22 <sipa> CLTV?
18:22 <glozow> CLTV OOPS
18:22 <glozow> no CTV yet
18:22 <michaelfolkson> I missed the CTV soft fork happened ;)
18:23 <jnewbery> glozow: is it something to do with the V part of CLTV?
18:24 <robot-dreams> Wild guess, is it because you now want maximal flags and are enforcing `CLEANSTACK`?
18:24 <murch> robot-dreams: That would explain why they are removed, but not why some were left in
18:25 <glozow> btw here's an example of a test that _isn't_ getting its 1 removed: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698/files#diff-7e4229911841f1d419c71a0d0df95feb07b77f90c0ff39f09182eb8ca50779b9L199
18:25 <murch> Or maybe it does
18:26 <glozow> what does the script "0 CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY 1" do?
18:26 <glozow> vs a script "499999999 CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY 1" (which we're removing the 1 from)?
18:27 <sipa> the first leaves "0 1" on the stack if it succeeds; the second leaves "499999999 1" on the stack
18:27 <nehan> why are the policy script checks defined in STANDARD_SCRIPT_VERIFY_FLAGS in policy.h but the consensus script checks are enumerated separately in the function GetBlockScriptFlags?
18:27 <pinheadmz> sipa CLTV doesnt pop a number off the stack when it compares to the tx locktime ?
18:27 <willcl_ark> Well we need the script to end non-zero, which the first won't do without  the final `1`
18:28 <sipa> pinheadmz: it cannot! it's a redefined NOP
18:28 <glozow> pinheadmz: nope! why :P
18:28 <glozow> AW MAN SIPA U GAVE IT AWAY
18:28 <jnewbery> if an opcode has verify in the name, then it leaves the stack unchanged
18:28 <sipa> sowwwy
18:28 <glozow> NOPs can't touch the stack!
18:28 <sipa> jnewbery: wrong
18:28 <jnewbery> oh really?
18:28 <sipa> CHECKSIGVERIFY definitely modifies the stack
18:28 <jnewbery> yes, totally wrong
18:28 <jnewbery> ignore me
18:28 <sipa> /ignore jnewbery
18:28 <michaelfolkson> That's generally right though
18:28 <michaelfolkson> Just some counterexamples
18:29 <glozow> ok we can still use our brains a little bit... WHY can't upgradeable NOPs touch the stack?
18:29 <pinheadmz> if the CLTV failed though, these examples would fail technically with n empty stack because the 1 at the end would never get pushed to the stack
18:29 <murch> Because that would be a hardfork
18:29 <willcl_ark> so that old clients don't fail the scripts
18:29 <pinheadmz> glozow bc they were soft forked in! i shouldve known
18:29 <robot-dreams> nehan: I think it's because consensus checks depends on which block you're on (so you can't just set hardcoded flags)
18:29 <glozow> yaaaaaaas
18:30 <pinheadmz> oops i mean they would fail without the 1 but still the first number bc of the NOPness
18:30 <glozow> and yes, sorry nehan, i forgot to get back to you on your question - block script flags change from block to block, so we re-calculate them every time
18:30 <sipa> robot-dreams: yeah, policy just always enables everything we know about; consensus flags depend on context
18:30 <glozow> thanks robot-dreams :)
18:30 <nehan> robot-dreams: thanks!
18:30 <glozow> alrighty, so why don't we take off the 1 at the end of "0 CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY 1" ?
18:31 <glozow> (this is a valid tx btw)
18:31 <willcl_ark> we need non-zero stack at the end
18:31 <glozow> willcl_ark: exactly!
18:31 <MarcoFalke> some consensus flags can be and have been backdated to the genesis block, though
18:32 <willcl_ark> but does `499999999 CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY` not leave us with nothing too?
18:32 <glozow> well, what does 499999999 evaluate to?
18:32 <sipa> pinheadmz: if the CLTV fails the script immediately aborts entirely with failure; no code after it is executed anymore, but that's not really relevant if we've already aborted
18:32 <willcl_ark> ah it just gives 499999999 I see now
18:32 <willcl_ark> was looking at the wrong opcode
18:32 <glozow> 👍
18:32 <glozow> NEXT! What does `TrimFlags` do? (Extra credit question: why does SCRIPT_VERIFY_CLEANSTACK need to be used with SCRIPT_VERIFY_P2SH and SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS?)
18:33 <pinheadmz> MarcoFalke example ?
18:33 <MarcoFalke> pinheadmz: the witness v0 script flags
18:33 <glozow> link to the TrimFlags code: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/110239f2ff673eaea8f59c650792f3641855263d/src/test/transaction_tests.cpp#L138-L148
18:33 <robot-dreams> I'm a bit behind... I understand why we cannot take off the 1 at the end of "0 CLTV 1", but just to confirm, why DO we take off the 1 at the end of "499999999 CLTV 1"?
18:34 <MarcoFalke> pinheadmz: ok wait, they aren't enabled for the p2sh exception, so still depend on context
18:34 <sipa> robot-dreams: what would the script do if you left the "1" off?
18:34 <glozow> robot-dreams: we'd like a clean stack, and in that case we'd have 4999999 and 1 at the end
18:34 <sipa> robot-dreams: oh, i misread
18:34 <glozow> would anyone who's been quiet today like to tell us what CLEANSTACK means? :)
18:35 <murch> robot-dreams: I am also still wondering that.
18:35 <sipa> glozow: you could turn it into "0 CLTV DROP 1" if you wanted cleanstack for the first :)
18:35 <felixweis> it means that after all opcodes have executed on the stack, the stack must be empty or 1 (i forgot)
18:35 <willcl_ark> Single stack element remaining after execution
18:35 <robot-dreams> sipa: Yes, that was my confusion. I didn't understand why `0 1` would be considered a claen stack
18:36 <sipa> robot-dreams: it's not
18:36 <murch> Ah, thanks.
18:36 <pinheadmz> is the cleanstack rule just a malleability fix?
18:37 <willcl_ark> So am I right in reading CLEANSTACk is not consensus critical before taproot, but is for taproot?
18:37 <glozow> felixweis: yup! we don't want any extra items on the stack. I think 0 vs 1 depends on context too, sipa explains it here https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20006#issuecomment-698487304
18:37 <sipa> willcl_ark: CLEANSTACK really means two different things
18:37 <felixweis> its required since segwit and p2sh
18:37 <murch> So previously the test was merely considering the tx valid because we didn't enforce the cleanstack rule, and now that we're defaulting to all flags, it would fail on the cleanstack rule
18:38 <willcl_ark> aha
18:38 <sipa> the script flag CLEANSTACK is only for top-level script evaluation
18:38 <willcl_ark> also: "Note: CLEANSTACK should never be used without P2SH or WITNESS."
18:38 <sipa> witv0/taproot have an implicit cleanstack-like behavior as part of their consensus rules
18:39 <willcl_ark> thanks sipa.
18:39 <sipa> but that isn't controlled by the CLEANSTACK flag
18:39 <glozow> right
18:39 <willcl_ark> Just to keep devs on their toes :P
18:39 <felixweis> so if the taproot stack after execution is empty and cleanstack is enabled the input still fails?
18:40 <glozow> ok everybody, I don't want to lose people so let's just go back to the first question :) what does TrimFlags do?
18:40 <robot-dreams> `TrimFlags` enforces constraints between flags (e.g. if CLEANSTACK is on, WITNESS must be on), and does so by turning off flags.
18:40 <glozow> robot-dreams: correct!
18:41 <glozow> what does `~` do in this context?
18:41 <michaelfolkson> bitwise NOT
18:41 <glozow> michaelfolkson: yup!
18:41 <robot-dreams> Do we expect many more such constraints in the future?
18:41 <murch> felixweis: Empty stack is also a problem, I think it should end on a single element.
18:41 <glozow> (not a flag destructor, in some countries that is illegal)
18:42 <felixweis> single element != 0
18:42 <glozow> Arriving at our main course today: What does it mean for script verify flags to be “minimal” and “maximal?”
18:42 <pinheadmz> ha
18:42 <glozow> robot-dreams: not sure. depends on sipa i guess
18:43 <sipa> help
18:43 <sipa> i sincerely hope not
18:43 <murch> glozow: Valid txes should pass with all flags that are not explicitly excluded in this specific transactino, and invalid txes should fail on exactly the specific flag that's tested
18:44 <glozow> murch: yes! we don't want transaction tests to be passing/failing because we omitted/added extra flags
18:44 <willcl_ark> yes, maximal should mean that adding any extra flag will make the transaction fail
18:44 <murch> felixweis: I'm not sure what you mean. Do you mean to express that "0" is empty stack?
18:45 <glozow> willcl_ark: yes! thanks for elaborating more concretely
18:45 <glozow> so how do we implement this? what does the PR do to test for maximal/minimal flags?
18:45 <murch> And minimal means that no flags can be removed without making the tx pass as valid
18:45 <glozow> Code at https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/110239f2ff673eaea8f59c650792f3641855263d/src/test/transaction_tests.cpp#L241-L246
18:45 <felixweis> murch: i thought it has to be a single element value. does the value have to be boolan true?
18:46 <sipa> felixweis: [] is an empty stack, [""] is not
18:46 <sipa> OP_0 pushes "" onto the stack
18:46 <robot-dreams> For a valid transaction, we try every unset flag and make sure adding it invalidates the transaction.
18:46 <felixweis> thanks
18:47 <glozow> robot-dream: correct 👌
18:47 <murch> sipa: But does a stack have to be empty or end on a positive single element in the end. I thought it was the latter for valid txes.
18:47 <robot-dreams> I had a question about that, would it be helpful to try every valid *combination* of unset flags, or would that blow up the test time way too much?
18:47 <glozow> robot-dreams: that's the next question :P
18:47 <sipa> murch: you have to have a stack with a single element in it, which has to be nonzero
18:47 <willcl_ark> stack has to terminate with any element not `0`
18:48 <murch> Thx
18:48 <sipa> murch: (for CLEANSTACK)
18:48 <felixweis> what about NaN? /s
18:48 <murch> Right
18:48 <glozow> ok and what about testing that invalid transaction tests are minimal? how's that implemented?
18:48 <sipa> without CLEANSTACK, a non-empty stack whose top element is nonzero is enough
18:48 <glozow> have minimal flags* i mean
18:48 <murch> glozow: Presumably by trying to remove every set flag in turn and checking that this makes the tx vaild
18:48 <glozow> murch: correct
18:49 <glozow> but hey, is it possible that we're removing a flag and getting an invalid combination? e.g. CLEANSTACK without P2SH?
18:49 <felixweis> isnt that what trimflags is for?
18:49 <murch> No, because if CLEANSTACK is set P2SH is turned back on by trimFlags()
18:49 <robot-dreams> Yeah, I think glozow addresses this with FillFlags / TrimFlags calls
18:50 <glozow> felixweis murch robot-dreams yah it's almost like last question feeds into this question
18:50 <michaelfolkson> Just to confirm sipa. For CLEANSTACK you have to have a stack with a single element in it which has to be nonzero. Without CLEANSTACK a non-empty stack with multiple elements is ok as long as the top element is nonzero?
18:50 <glozow> WOOT
18:50 <murch> glozow: You've set us up
18:50 <glozow> last question! What does it mean for script verify flags to be “soft forks?” How do the tests check this?
18:50 <sipa> michaelfolkson: correct
18:51 <glozow> hint: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10699
18:51 <emzy> michaelfolkson: thx for the sum up.
18:52 <glozow> bigger hint: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3caee16946575e71e90ead9ac531f5a3a1259307/src/script/interpreter.h#L36-L40
18:52 <murch> glozow: I think it means that no flags should increase the set of acceptable txes when they're turned on
18:52 <felixweis> these flags only apply to mempool policy. so older nodes will not accept and forward new transaction features.
18:52 <robot-dreams> michaelfolkson: Thanks! Just to confirm, in this PR would it be necessary to change `0 CLTV 1` into `0 CLTV DROP 1` as sipa mentioned above?
18:53 <michaelfolkson> sipa: And so without CLEANSTACK you could have a horrible non-empty stack with TRUE FALSE 3 and it would pass. I don't think I understand this...
18:53 <felixweis> because we can't verify the new rules, people might be ddosing us with invalid transactions under new (yet to be definded) soft fork rules
18:53 <murch> glozow: TBH, I'm only getting that from interpreting your commit message, though (^_^)/
18:53 <glozow> robot-dreams: yes, this PR enforces that the tests do CLEANSTACK
18:53 <glozow> (when they can)
18:53 <sipa> michaelfolkson: yes; what's hard to understand about that?
18:54 <michaelfolkson> Why should it pass? It is a mess haha
18:54 <sipa> why wouldn't it?
18:54 <dhruvm> glozow: script verify flags are soft forks because each new flag can only be more restrictive. The tests check that here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698/files#diff-cc0c6a9039a1c9fe38b8a21fe28391fffbac9b8531dfda0f658919a9f74b46baR229 by making sure that the flags are maximal after `TrimFlags`?
18:54 <sipa> the computation succeeded
18:54 <felixweis> the final check just looks at the top element
18:54 <glozow> murch dhruvm: yup, adding a flag can never increase the space of valid scripts
18:55 <sipa> michaelfolkson: say the script is a boring "<pubkey> OP_CHECKSIG"; normally you'd pass it a [<sig>] as input, and it'd leave [1] on the stack
18:55 <sipa> if you pass it [<garbage1>,<garbage2>,<sig>], it'll leave [<garbage1>,<garbage2>,1] on the stack instead
18:55 <glozow> so we add/subtract individual flags to check this, but what about combinations of flags like robot-dreams mentioned earlier?
18:55 <felixweis> michaelfolkson: maybe some fancy script designers wanted to do multiple conditional execution paths and the shortest definition to do both didn't leave the stack clean
18:55 <sipa> whatever the script was enforcing worked just fine, but there is garbage left
18:56 <glozow> hint: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19698/files#diff-cc0c6a9039a1c9fe38b8a21fe28391fffbac9b8531dfda0f658919a9f74b46baR328
18:56 <sipa> michaelfolkson: i think you have to see bitcoin script as a programming language, and that language used to be defined without cleanstack... so you write scripts that do what you want given those semantics
18:57 <sipa> now the language does have cleanstack, and in theory that means you need slightly different scripts to do what you want
18:57 <sipa> in practice... not really
18:57 <dhruvm> glozow: since the flags have dependencies, you probably can't do all combinations?
18:57 <michaelfolkson> Ok I guess I'm surprised because I always thought a dirty stack (in the context of CLEANSTACK) would always fail. I misunderstood the other ways a script could still pass
18:57 <glozow> dhruvm: yes! so what do we do instead?
18:58 <dhruvm> glozow: TrimFlags?
18:58 <glozow> er i mean, we don't do all of them because that'd be 2^n
18:58 <michaelfolkson> But thanks sipa felixweis
18:58 <felixweis> was there ever a transaction using "p2sh" before p2sh activated? in other words would p2sh soft fork from genesis fork the chain?
18:58 <glozow> that's a lotta testing
18:58 <robot-dreams> glozow pulls out the RNG
18:58 <glozow> yeah! we just do random combinations :P
18:58 <sdaftuar> felixweis: one i think
18:58 <glozow> sorry, rushed the last question a little
18:58 <sipa> sdaftuar: oh, really?
18:59 <glozow> We've reached the end of our program. Thanks everyone! And now, a word from our sponsor, jnewbery
18:59 <jnewbery> it's the reason we can't apply P2SH/segwit back to genesis, right?
18:59 <dhruvm> glozow: Does that makes the test failures hard to reproduce?
18:59 <felixweis> sdaftuar: thanks, was it someone just experimenting with all the opcodes?
18:59 <MarcoFalke> (slightly off-topic) There is also a fuzz test that does random combinations: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3caee16946575e71e90ead9ac531f5a3a1259307/src/test/fuzz/script_flags.cpp#L54
18:59 <sdaftuar> jnewbery: yes, trying to find my notes on it
18:59 <jnewbery> thanks glozow. That was great. Really good dive into some pretty complex parts of the code.
18:59 <jnewbery> Hope everyone enjoyed!
18:59 <glozow> dhruvm: yeah i guess, but these are mostly sanity checks for making sure the test you wrote was correct. meta-testing 🤷
18:59 <willcl_ark> thanks glozow!
18:59 <jnewbery> I just wanted to repeat my request for hosts from the start. I have a slot open next week for anyone who's keen.
19:00 <felixweis> thanks glozow!!
19:00 <sipa> dhruvm: i expect that in practice this is not a problem; if there were an actual softforkability bug somewhere that these tests catch, you'll suddenly have tons of combinations fail
19:00 <cangr> thanks a lot
19:00 <robot-dreams> sdaftaur: Is this related to the comment at the start of `GetBlockScriptFlags` that says "one historical block violated the P2SH rules"?
19:00 <thomasb06> thanks glozow
19:00 <jnewbery> (and every week after that)
19:00 <elle> Thanks glozow! that was awesome. really enjoy learning about Script
19:00 <sipa> glozow: thanks!
19:00 <robot-dreams> Thanks glozow, great session!
19:00 <pinheadmz> good show glozow and jnewbery !
19:00 <emzy> Thanks glozow and all. I lerned a lot!
19:00 <glozow> thanks everyone ^_^ tough review club today, thanks for sticking with me
19:00 <darius27> thanks glozow!! I learned a lot
19:00 <MarcoFalke> dhruvm: I think it makes it harder to reproduce, as the randomness seed is unknown
19:00 <dhruvm> sipa: that makes sense.
19:00 <jnewbery> just message me if you're interested in hosting and I can put you on the roster
19:00 <jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
