---
layout: pr
date: 2020-05-06
title: "Remove is{Empty,Full} flags from CBloomFilter, clarify CVE fix"
pr: 18806
authors: [theStack]
components: ["p2p"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: 1ad8ea2b
---

## Notes

- A [bloom filter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter) is a
  probabilistic data structure. It supports two operations:
  - _adding_ an element to the filter.
  - _querying_ an element from the filter.

- If an element has been previously added, then querying for the element will
  return _true_. If an element has not been added, then querying for the
  element may return _true_ or _false_. In other words, querying may return a
  _false positive_, but will never return a _false negative_.

- See the [wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom_filter) for
  how a bloom filter is implemented with hash functions onto a bitfield. Note
  that the false positive rate depends on the size of the filter and the number
  of hash functions.

- [BIP 37](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0037.mediawiki)
  introduced a new method for [Simple Payment Verification
  (SPV)](https://bitcoin.org/en/operating-modes-guide#simplified-payment-verification-spv)
  clients to use bloom filters to track transactions that affect their addresses.
  BIP 37 was implemented in Bitcoin Core in [PR
  1795](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/1795).

- Using the P2P messages defined in BIP 37, an SPV client can request that a
  full node send it transactions which match a bloom filter. The full node will
  then relay unconfirmed transactions that match the filter, and the client can
  request [merkle
  blocks](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/608359b071dac82a9cf33a6c9e01f87abfcb90eb/src/merkleblock.h#L127-L132),
  which only contain the transactions that match the filter.

- The SPV client chooses the bloom filter parameters (filter size, number of
  hashes and a 'tweak' for the hashes) and sends them to the node in a
  `filterload` message.

- The original implementation contained a logic bug. If the client sent a
  `filterload` message with a zero-sized filter, then the serving node could
  later attempt a divide-by-zero and crash when querying an element from the
  filter. See
  [CVE-2013-5700](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2013-5700)
  for further details.

- This bug was quietly fixed in [PR
  2914](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/2914) without advertising the
  reason. That fix added the `isFull` and `isEmpty` booleans, which have proven
  to be confusing for developers.

- This [PR 18806](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18806) removes those
  `isFull` and `isEmpty` booleans and adds a more straightforward fix for the
  issue.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
   (Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. Why was the motivation for [PR
   2914](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/2914) not made explicit?

3. Serving bloom filters is now disabled by default for full nodes. Why? What
   are some of the problems with BIP 37? What alternatives are there?

4. How is this PR tested? Are there any additional tests that could be added?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
13:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
13:00 < achow101> sipa: yes. I was just testing bad versions for the expected error
13:00 < jnewbery> hi folks. Welcome to the Bitcoin Core PR Review club meeting!
13:00 < b10c> hi
13:00 < jnewbery> feel free to say hi to let people know you're here
13:00 < bordalix> hi
13:00 < fjahr> hi
13:00 < pinheadmz> hi! 👋
13:00 < lightlike> hi
13:00 < ccdle12> hi
13:00 < raj_149> hi
13:00 < theStack> hi
13:00 < ariard> hi
13:00 < nehan> hi
13:00 < thomasb06> hi
13:00 < jnewbery> Notes and questions are in the normal place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/18806.html
13:01 < jonatack> hi
13:01 < vasild> hi
13:01 < jkczyz> hi
13:01 < the_nomad> Hello chaps
13:01 < michaelfolkson>  Hi
13:01 < emzy> Hi
13:01 < willcl_ark> hi
13:01 < r251d> hi
13:01 < handed> hi
13:01 < brikk> hi
13:01 < nehan> the_nomad: we are not all chaps :)
13:01 < sipa> hi
13:02 < jnewbery> This week we're covering quite a straightforward refactor PR. There have been a lot of new participants at these meetings the last few weeks, and recent meetings have gone quite deep into P2P and validation logic, so I though it'd be nice to look at something a bit simpler this week.
13:02 < ariard> wait isn't since 1-year bitcoin pr review club has been started ?
13:02 < andrewtoth> hi
13:02 < nehan> happy anniversary jnewbery!
13:02 < jnewbery> it's also a great opportunity to ask more basic questions about the Bitcoin Core review process
13:03 < pinheadmz> !! !! !! 1 whole year !! !! !!
13:03 < fjahr> happy anniversary \o/
13:03 < theStack> happy anniversary also from my side!
13:03 < sipa> congrats jnewbery and all who help running this, keep going :)
13:03 < b10c> ariard: just checked. I think you are right! Happy anniversary!
13:03 < raj_149> Happy anniversary. :D
13:03 < jnewbery> happy anniversary everyone! I only host about once a month now. This club belongs to all of us!
13:03 < ariard> jnewbery: hey happy anniversary, a litte gift from people here https://gist.github.com/ariard/6a40fe158d419126a8e5b0f36d691f28 :)
13:04 < pinheadmz> woo hoo!!! HBD club <3
13:04 < jnewbery> awww thanks everyone!
13:04 < ariard> and they ots proof for onchain commitment ahah https://gist.github.com/ariard/b6014d1a887182e0c7cdd37589ec339e ;)
13:04 < amiti> :D
13:04 < ariard> *the
13:04 < willcl_ark> handsup.gif
13:04 < lightlike> happy anniversary!
13:04 < andrewtoth> happy anniversary! thanks jnewbery!
13:05 < pinheadmz> no-one's crying! (sniff)
13:05 < sipa> i hope everyone remains committed and committed on-chain to keep doing this :p
13:05  * sipa hides
13:05 < ariard> you can do `ots verify digital_card.ots`
13:05 < jnewbery> I'm not crying, honest
13:06 < pinheadmz> ariard: great job :-) ty
13:06 < jnewbery> that's really touching. Thanks everyone!
13:06 < raj_149> Thank for the amazing work you do jnewbery. I have learned a lot from this club.
13:06 < jnewbery> ok, let's talk about Bitcoin
13:07 < ariard> yeah always talk about bitcoin
13:07 < theStack> :)
13:07 < sipa> hey did you guys know the blockly subsidy halves next week!?
13:07 < thomasb06> I have a basic question...
13:08 < pinheadmz> sipa: 761 more blocks !
13:08 < jnewbery> The PR was merged today, but it's a good idea to still review merged PRs. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18806
13:08 < sipa> guys and non-guys
13:09 < willcl_ark> s/you guys/y'all   ;)
13:09 < jnewbery> who had a chance to review the pr? y/n
13:09 < brikk> y
13:09 < fjahr> y
13:09 < raj_149> y
13:09 < pinheadmz> y
13:09 < the_nomad> y
13:09 < nehan> y
13:09 < ariard> y
13:09 < lightlike> y
13:09 < theStack> sipa: oh yes -- unfortunately there won't be any possibility to physically participate in a halving party :/
13:09 < vasild> y
13:09 < bordalix> y
13:09 < andrewtoth> y
13:09 < jnewbery> thomasb06: feel free to ask questions at any point. No need to wait
13:09 < michaelfolkson> y
13:09 < r251d> y
13:09 < thomasb06> Is it possible to review a PR without being able to code it?
13:09 < ccdle12> y
13:09 < jnewbery> Wow. Lots of review. No wonder it got merged
13:10 < jonatack> happy 1st birthday to the review club everyone 🏆 🚀
13:10 < sipa> y
13:10 < jkczyz> y
13:10 < jnewbery> thomasb06: yes! You can still test the code and leave a comment saying what you did
13:10 < bordalix> hummmm, I review it but didn't ACK on the repo. Do that count?
13:10 < fjahr> much more y's than reviews in the PR, I think more people should post their reviews on GH :)
13:10 < thomasb06> jnewbery: cool... This was my main concern
13:10 < jonatack> fjahr: +1
13:11 < jnewbery> don't expect to fully understand everything on your first reviews. As you get more experience, you'll understand more and more
13:11 < michaelfolkson> thomasb06: Concept ACK doesn't need code review. Nor does running tests
13:11 < jonatack> thomasb06: i do hope so... i do it all the time :p
13:12 < jnewbery> fjahr: definitely. If you're reviewing but not leaving comments, then you're depriving everyone else of your knkowledge and insights
13:12 < brikk> thomasb06: I think a good start is to do what I did, checkout the branch, figure out how to build the code and run the tests
13:12 < jnewbery> ok, first question: Why was the motivation for PR 2914 not made explicit?
13:12 < thomasb06> but... michaelfolkson ok, you answered the question before I asked
13:12 < vasild> because it was a security vulnerability
13:12 < pinheadmz> jnewbery: an attacker could remotely crash bitcoind by setting a bloom filter of 0 size
13:12 < handed> jnewbery flaw could bring down nodes by exhausting resources
13:12 < raj_149> because it was a bug.
13:13 < nehan> jnewbery: code is pushed before it's deployed to the network, so someone would have seen the possible attack
13:13 < thomasb06> brikk: ok, thanks
13:13 < jnewbery> vasild pinheadmz nehan: yes!
13:13 < lightlike> i wonder if a covert fix  like this would still be possible today - someone surely would challenge the claim that this is a performance optimization and ask for benchmarks?!
13:13 < jnewbery> handed: almost. It could bring down a node, but it's by a segfault, not resource exhaustion
13:13 < michaelfolkson> lightlike: You would hope so ;)
13:14 < sipa> not a segfault, a division by zero
13:14 < theStack> lightlike: interesting question, i also asked myself this quite a lot... i think the quality of reviews has increased drastically, looking at old PRs
13:14 < fjahr> lightlike: maybe the covert techniques have improved as well ;)
13:14 < jnewbery> raj_149: we fix lots of bugs overtly all the time. This was covert because of the nature and seriousness of the bug
13:14 < jnewbery> sipa: yup. Thanks
13:14 < handed> sipa isn't burning up the CPU resource exhaustion or am I not translating accurately?
13:14 < raj_149> jnewbery: The first comment of gmaxwell in 2914 gives away the motivation. So how its still a covert fix?
13:14 < vasild> lightlike: so one would also have to do some real improvement in performance + secret fix merged in one patch :-D
13:14 < michaelfolkson> So this could have knocked all v0.8 nodes off the network?
13:15 < sipa> handed: not sure what you mean by burning up the CPU; the node would just crash with a division by zero trap
13:15 < sipa> instantly, without any cpu or memory usage
13:15 < sipa> michaelfolkson: all reachable ones, yes
13:15 < handed> ok, I thought it would cause some excess computation which would cause the crash, ty for clarifying
13:15 < jnewbery> raj_149: it was claimed that the problem was resource wastage. The actual problem was instacrash
13:16 < handed> jnewbery ty for clarification
13:16 < raj_149> oh i see..
13:16 < ariard> if people are interested by cover fix, see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11397 and https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2019-November/017453.html
13:16 < ariard> *covert
13:17 < jnewbery> michaelfolkson: I believe bloom filters were on by default, so I think it would be able to knock out the majority of nodes at the time
13:17 < sipa> jnewbery: i don't think it was possible to turn them off
13:17 < michaelfolkson> jnewbery: Majority of 0.8 nodes? No bloom filters pre 0.8
13:18 < jnewbery> sipa: oh interesting. Yes, I see that's explicit in BIP 111: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0111.mediawiki
13:18 < jonatack> ariard: thanks
13:18 < jnewbery> "BIP 37 did not specify a service bit for the bloom filter service, thus implicitly assuming that all nodes that serve peers data support it."
13:19 < jnewbery> ok, next question: Serving bloom filters is now disabled by default for full nodes. Why? What are some of the problems with BIP 37? What alternatives are there?
13:19 < michaelfolkson> There were 3 CVEs in that 0.8 release...
13:19 < theStack> by the way, pr #2914 was buggy as well and actually didn't solve the problem (a followup PR by gmaxwell followed soon after though :))
13:20 < lightlike> theStack: interesting, what was the id of the follow up?
13:20 < pinheadmz> jnewbery: server side filtering means more work for publicly acesible nodes, and neutrino offers a better privacy and security model
13:20 < michaelfolkson> Problems with BIP 37. Privacy, false positives
13:20 < theStack> lightlike: #2919
13:21 < handed> bip 37 enables amplification attacks by clients to servers of the filters
13:21 < pinheadmz> handed: how is that? whats amplified?
13:21 < jnewbery> pinheadmz michaelfolkson: yes, problems with BIP 37 are server resource usage and poor privacy
13:21 < handed> you can spam many requests to a server at very little cost and cause a disproportionaitly high amount of compute load
13:22 < andrewtoth> an alternative is compact block filters in general, neutrino is a specific implementation using them to sync I believe
13:22 < ariard> there was a a risk of disk I/O Dos, see a Poc attack https://github.com/petertodd/bloom-io-attack
13:23 < jnewbery> andrewtoth: thanks for that clarification. Neutrino is an implementation of BIP 157/158
13:24 < jnewbery> We covered the proposed BIP 157 implementation in a previous review club: https://bitcoincore.reviews/16442.html
13:25 < theStack> one of the major advantages of server side filters is that they are deterministic, i.e. no need to maintain an individual state for each peer?
13:25 < jnewbery> Any other questions about BIP 37 or should we move on?
13:25 < jnewbery> theStack: exactly. It means they can be cached and delivered from anywhere, and a client can fetch from diverse sources
13:25 < ariard> theStack: yeah it's O(1) in CPU computation whatever the number of clients served
13:25 < handed> theStack +1
13:26 < sipa> theStack: no cpu cost per request, ability for client to compare filters from multiple nodes, ... possibility even to at some point soft fork it in so that you have an SPV-level proof of no censorship, ...
13:27 < jnewbery> ok. Final question (but feel free to ask anything about BIP 37 / BIP 157/158 if you think of it later)
13:27 < jnewbery> How is this PR tested? Are there any additional tests that could be added?
13:28 < pinheadmz> there was a test in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18515
13:29 < ccdle12> functional test that sends an empty nElements
13:29 < raj_149> it was tested by the p2p_filter.py functional test.
13:29 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: right, and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18672
13:30 < jnewbery> Nice approach to add a test first, and then show that the refactor doesn't change behaviour
13:30 < michaelfolkson> And a fuzz test
13:31 < andrewtoth> didn't we review the fuzz test in here a while back?
13:31 < jnewbery> ok, that was all the questions I had. I wanted this week's meeting to be a chance for people to ask more general questions about the review process, so hopefully some of you have questions.
13:31 < jonatack> it's in the PR description -> 18521
13:31 < theStack> ad server side filters: seems to be a great idea and actually seems much more logical than client side filters; one drawback though seems to be that more data has to be transferred
13:31 < jnewbery> Don't be shy if it's your first time!
13:32 < r251d> Sorry if I missed the time to ask this question, but could an empty `vData` cause a problematic modulo division by zero here? https://github.com/theStack/bitcoin/blob/1ad8ea2b73134bdd8d6b50704a019d47ad2191d8/src/bloom.cpp#L43
13:32 < theStack> jnewbery: it was not planned from me originally to refactor -- that was inspired by a recent pr review club meeting on fuzzing :)
13:32 < jnewbery> andrewtoth: we reviewed a different fuzz test: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17860.html
13:32 < sipa> r251d: that's exactly where the bug was triggered
13:32 < brikk> r251d: exactly what I was going to ask too :)
13:33 < sipa> r251d: and it's avoided by making sure that function can't be called when vData is empty
13:33 < lightlike> andrewtoth: there is a specific one src/test/fuzz/bloom_filter.cpp - we reviewed one on process_messages that indirectly also creates the msgs for the bloom if you let it run for a while
13:33 < raj_149> r251d: isn't thats what exactly the bug was?
13:33 < brikk> why is there no vData.empty() check in this method?
13:33 < theStack> also i was very unsure if this would get concept acks, as bip37 is kind of anachronistic and according to gmaxwell there were discussions about removing bloom filter support completely years ago
13:33 < brikk> doesn't that add  a risk  of another method calling it without first checking if it's empty?
13:33 < nehan> brikk: i was wondering the same thing. why not check closer to use?
13:33 < theStack> happy that i could help and that it was accepted though
13:33 < sipa> brikk: it's already too late by that point
13:34 < r251d> I see. The calling functoins all check vData.empty() and return before calling Hash()
13:34 < sipa> there is no reasonable answer the function can give
13:34 < jnewbery> theStack. I'm glad you did. Cleaning up code so it clearly matches expectations is a worthy exercise!
13:34 < sipa> it could contain an assert
13:34  * vasild afk
13:34 < nehan> or at least a comment that says that the caller of this function is responsible for making sure vData.size() is not 0
13:35 < sipa> yeah that would make a lot of sense
13:35 < jkczyz> jnewbery: Regararding testing, a unit test where CBloomFilter is constructed with nElements == 0 would also catch this
13:35 < jnewbery> jkczyz: I agree. A unit test seems like a natural place to test this.
13:36 < ccdle12> I was just wondering if CBloomFilter construction in net_processing by "vRecv >> filter" is constructed via `serialize.h` and is using those macros the preferred way to deserialize to objects in Bitcoin?
13:36 < jnewbery> I found it slightly weird that CBloomFilter has two ctors, one that is used in the product code and one that is only used in tests
13:37 < theStack> jnewbery: agreed, this ctor also confused me quite a lot when i started digging into this code... a comment like "only used for tests" would make sense here
13:37 < sipa> ccdle12: filter is constructed at the time it is defined; deserialization only fills it
13:38 < michaelfolkson> Let's say an attacker had successfully pushed all v0.8 nodes off the network. Is there anything he/she could've done other than causing havoc? Target a specfic node with sybils when it comes back up?
13:38 < nehan> question on reviewing: this was already merged. is there any benefit in leaving a comment saying it would be nice to have an assert in Hash()?
13:38 < jnewbery> net_processing only uses the constructor with no parameters
13:38 < lightlike> but would an assert help? does it matter much if the node crashes b/c of a divide by zero or bc the assert is triggered?
13:38 < sipa> lightlike: no... it might make debugging slightly easier, but that's it
13:38 < theStack> nehan: i think yes, as someone could grasp an idea for a follow-up pr
13:39 < nehan> fair point!
13:39 < handed> nehan: what's the harm, I think it's positive for people reviewing the reviews to know how people felt about the PR
13:39 < jnewbery> nehan: I think so. Even better would be to offer to open that PR
13:39 < sipa> lightlike: the main advantage of an assert is documenting the expectations
13:39 < thomasb06> Are there PRs for tests too, I'd rather review Python than C++?
13:39 < ccdle12> sipa: I see thanks that makes sense, so I guess the msg type is already validated before attempting deserialize?
13:39 < jonatack> nehan: i think post-merge review is great, either to prep a follow-up or even better, if you catch a regression!
13:39 < sipa> thomasb06: many!
13:39 < thomasb06> sipa: cool
13:40 < sipa> ccdle12: eh, i think you're confused
13:40 < theStack> lightlike: well at least one would know _where_ it crashed :)
13:40 < jnewbery> thomasb06: yes, there are lots. Look for PRs that have the Tests label: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3ATests
13:40 < sipa> ccdle12: deserialization can definitely fail if the data in the stream is not a valid CBloomFilter
13:40 < sipa> in which case it will throw an exception
13:40 < handed> michaelfolkson re: attacker, if the node that submits block headers to a pool is crashed then that could create a lower effective hashrate / hmm maybe a chain split?
13:41 < thomasb06> jnewbery: thanks, that's where I need to start
13:41 < ccdle12> sipa: aah ok thanks, that's what I was wondering, looks like I'll need to dive into the serialize h file :)
13:41 < jnewbery> There were a couple on twitter from @nickycutesc
13:41 < jnewbery> *couple of questions
13:42 < jnewbery> "What’s the best way to debug unit tests?
13:42 < michaelfolkson> Twitter? What is that? :)
13:42 < jnewbery> and "Favorite IDE? gdb on a terminal is....interesting."
13:43 < jonatack> fjahr: can you repost the new home for your debugging gist?
13:43 < sipa> EDLIN.COM
13:43 < thomasb06> jnewbery: what does a review consist in, read the modifications brough and if agreed acknowledge with a Concept ACK?
13:43 < jnewbery> https://github.com/fjahr/debugging_bitcoin
13:43 < michaelfolkson> handed: I think you'd need to sybil the pool. Any honest connection and the chain wouldn't split?
13:43 < fjahr> https://github.com/fjahr/debugging_bitcoin :) still need to put some more work in but should be helpful nevertheless
13:44 < jnewbery> fjahr: that's a great resource. Thanks for putting it together
13:44 < nehan> fjahr: i would like you to add equivalent linux commands :)
13:44 < raj_149> jnewbery: i have managed to debug unit tests in vscode. gdb felt little intimidating.
13:44 < nehan> fjahr: i'm happy to help if you would like it
13:44 < sipa> thomasb06: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
13:45 < thomasb06> sipa: thanks
13:45 < jnewbery> thomasb06: specifically the section on Decision Making Process
13:45 < jonatack> thomasb06: have a deep look at the articles mentioned on the review club home page, and spend time watching interation on github and looking at the docs and code in the repository
13:45 < emzy> sipa: the DOS program?
13:45 < fjahr> nehan: sure, it's a repo now instead of a gist so people can contribute :)
13:45 < michaelfolkson> https://jonatack.github.io/articles/how-to-review-pull-requests-in-bitcoin-core
13:45 < lightlike> i usually just add printfs for debugging
13:46 < handed> michaelfolkson I'm thinking that if mining operator doesn't get a new block header from pool operator (e.g. they continue mining on old headers because their pool operator's node has crashed due to CVE) that they can create another valid block B2, A<-B1 A<-B2
13:46 < jnewbery> printf/vim for me, but I don't want to start any religious wars
13:46 < handed> i.e. they're building work on an outdated tip
13:46 < ariard> thomasb06: try to understand the code structure and how any changes may alter program behavior, and if this behavior is expected or not compare to what his claim by author
13:47 < ariard> and how can you make with ways to assert code is correct, by adding functional tests, manual testing, change few parameters like new timers
13:47 < thomasb06> ariard: ok
13:47 < ariard> also you can look about previous changes on the same code area, what kind of issues is raised generally
13:48 < ariard> like if you do look on p2p, you care a lot about DoS vectors
13:48 < michaelfolkson> handed: Ok so that impacts the miners profits but whenever they get back online that doesn't impact the rest of the network
13:48 < michaelfolkson> Those blocks they "mined" get dropped like any normal chain re-org when they come back up
13:49 < handed> michaelfolkson it delays settlement for the network, seems to me that uncrashed nodes will have to wait and say "Hmm two valid, competing blocks exist. I don't know which one miners will continue to build on, I'll need to wait"
13:49 < sipa> handed: they will prefer the one they saw first
13:49 < nehan> thomasb06: i try to convince myself the code is correct. also think about how the change might impact performance. more/fewer disk reads? memory conserved?
13:49 < jonatack> another interesting debugging resource: some of achow101's twitch coding videos... the best parts imo are when he gets into the weeds, stuff is broken, and he has to fix it.
13:50 < thomasb06> nehan: yep
13:50 < jonatack> https://www.twitch.tv/achow101
13:51 < theStack> jonatack: thanks for the link. actually an interesting idea to watch someone coding
13:51 < nehan> jonatack: i haven't seen that, thanks!
13:51 < jnewbery> When I started reviewing Bitcoin Core PRs, I did a _lot_ of manual testing. I wanted to see for myself how the behaviour changed. Even if there are automated tests, it's a good exercise to try to trigger the new behaviour yourself
13:51 < handed> sipa sure but as you point on occasionally, it's all about which block gets built on, not if your tx is in the tip (unless the point is, if the chain diverges under non adversarial txs, all txns could eventually be included)
13:51 < sipa> handed: that's why you wait for 6 confirmations :)
13:51 < sipa> (or decide not doing so is an acceptable compromise)
13:52 < handed> exactly! but do you agree that having two competing blocks decreasing certainty that "6 confirms" have occured?
13:52 < jonatack> nehan: theStack: for C and c-lightning videos, there is also Lisa Neigut: https://www.twitch.tv/niftynei/videos
13:52 < handed> maybe I'm being pedantic
13:52 < fjahr> thomasb06: I gave a talk on the functional tests (the ones in python) but it seems it's still not uploaded yet by Bitcoin Edge. At least the slides are there, maybe they are a little bit helpful https://telaviv2019.bitcoinedge.org/presentations
13:52 < sipa> handed: sure, but at the same time you generally won't know there is a competing chain
13:52 < jnewbery> and if a PR didn't have an automated test, sometimes I'd write one and offer it to the PR author
13:52 < michaelfolkson> sipa handed: I'm thinking havoc is only attacker goal unless they can control the connections to that node when it comes back up
13:54 < michaelfolkson> sipa handed: Granted we want to stop havoc from happening. But it won't damage network once bug is addressed or cause people to lose money
13:54 < handed> >"won't know there is a competing chain"   I'm rusty, does a node not relay "B2" to peers if it's seen "B1" first?
13:54 < theStack> jonatack: awesome. i wanted to take a deeper look into lightning and in particular one of its implementations for a long time, maybe this is a good start
13:54 < sipa> handed: not sure what B1 and B2 are, but nodes will generally only relay their best chain
13:55 < jnewbery> handed: a node won't relay a block that isn't on its mainchain
13:55 < handed> A<-B1 A<-B2
13:55 < sipa> handed: in that case, no they won't
13:55 < jnewbery> ok, 5 minutes left. Any final questions?
13:55 < thomasb06> fjahr: great. They are a lot helpful
13:55 < sipa> handed: it's both a fingerprinting attack, and nodes have an incentive to make the network converge towards their view of the chain
13:56 < jnewbery> ok, in that case let's wrap it up there. One last thing before we go...
13:57 < jnewbery> I'm hoping to make some progress on getting jimpo's BIP 157 implementation merged: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18876
13:57 < handed> yeah, is your fingerprinting point: if peers can feed info to nodes and probe out information, they can gain visibility in peer topology?
13:58 < sipa> handed: yes, exactly
13:58  * handed thumbs up
13:58 < jnewbery> I've opened the first PR here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18877. Would anyone be interested in an extra review club session on that? It'd be slightly different from the normal session because it's explicitly to try to help get the PRs into a state ready for review.
13:59 < michaelf_> Definitely. When?
13:59 < jnewbery> *ready for merge
13:59 < the_nomad> Y
13:59 < fjahr> jnewbery: yes
13:59 < nehan> jnewbery: yes
13:59 < theStack> jnewbery: yes
13:59 < jonatack> jnewbery: wdym by state ready for review?
13:59 < ccdle12> jnewbery: yes
13:59 < brikk> nehan: I added a comment about the assert on the PR
13:59 < jonatack> (RFM)
13:59 < jnewbery> jonatack: sorry, ready for merge
13:59 < jkczyz> jnewbery: I plan on reviewing the 18877 today
13:59 < nehan> brikk: great!
14:00 < jnewbery> ok, same time tomorrow? We'll continue doing the normal review clubs on Wednesdays
14:00 < jonatack> jnewbery: at any rate, yes
14:00 < jnewbery> and on Thursdays try and get somewhere with BIP 157!
14:00 < jonatack> my main concern is that BIP157 remain opt-in
14:01 < jnewbery> ok, I've gotta dash. Thanks again everyone. And thanks to ariard for the card. That was very kind.
14:01 < jnewbery> jonatack: yep, it's off-by-default
14:01 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
