---
layout: pr
date: 2020-09-02
title: "Implement BIP 340-342 validation - Implement Taproot validation (BIP 341)"
pr: 17977
authors: [sipa]
components: ["consensus"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: 84ec87085
---

This is the fifth Review Club meeting on the (work in progress) implementation
of BIP 340-342.  We've previously looked at:

- [O(1) OP_IF/NOTIF/ELSE/ENDIF script implementation / Abstract out script
  execution out of VerifyWitnessProgram()](./16902)
- [Initialize PrecomputedTransactionData in CheckInputScripts and Move
  single-sig checking EvalScript code to EvalChecksig](./18401)
- [Implement Taproot signature hashing](./17977)
- [Support for Schnorr Signatures and integration in SignatureCheckers](./17977-2)

This week, we'll look at another commit from PR 17977 - _[Implement Taproot
validation (BIP
341)](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080c)_.

## Notes

- Remember that this PR uses an updated version of libsecp256k1 that requires
  the `--enable-module-schnorrsig` and `--enable-experimental` options. You may
  need to `make clean && ./configure && make` for the build to succeed.

- This commit implements the [_script validation
  rules_](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki#script-validation-rules)
  from BIP 341. It'll help to refer back to that specification as you review the
  code.

- There are several [script verification
  flags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4631dc5c/src/script/interpreter.h#L29-L117)
  defined in the software. These are passed to the script interpreter and specify
  which rules the interpreter should enforce. Each of these verification flags
  should be a tightening of the rules (adding a new script verification flag can
  make a previously succeeding script fail, but cannot make a previously failing
  script succeed).

- This commit adds two new script verification flags: `SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT`
  and `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION`. 

- _Pay-to-contract_ is a method of hiding a commitment inside a public key,
  which can be selectively revealed later. The idea has been around for many
  years, with the [original taproot
  post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-January/015614.html)
  citing [a paper by Ilja Gerhardt and Timo
  Hanke](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1212.3257.pdf) from 2012. Taproot uses pay-to-contract
  to commit to a script (or scripts) inside a public key.

- This commit adds a
  [CheckPayToContract()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-10ed0089ccea825883e83e5afcef7697R223)
  function, which calls through to the `secp256k1_xonly_pubkey_tweak_add_check()`
  function.

- The main code changes in this commit are in `src/script/interpreter.cpp`. The
  [VerifyWitnessProgram()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1697)
  is modified, and a new
  [VerifyTaprootCommitment()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1677)
  is added.

- Everything in the [if (stack.size == 1)
  branch](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1734-R1739)
  corresponds to the "If there is exactly one element left in the witness stack,
  key path spending is used" section of the BIP. Everything in the [else
  branch](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1740-R1755)
  corresponds to the "If there are at least two witness elements left, script
  path spending is used" part of the BIP.

- This commit does not add any script verification for the taproot script path
  spending (that comes in a later commit). Once the taproot commitment has been
  verified, we either fail validation if the
  `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION` is set, or succeed if it
  isn't
  ([code](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1751-R1754)).

## Questions

1. Will the new `SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT` and
   `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION` script verification
   flags be used for consensus checks or policy checks?

2. What is the maximum permitted size of the control block?

3. What happens if a segwit v1 output has a witness program that isn't 32
   bytes? What happens if there's a P2SH-wrapped segwit v1 output?

4. Explain this line: `if (!(flags & SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT)) return set_success(serror);`

5. What error is given if `VerifyTaprootCommitment()` fails? Why?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
17:00 < jnewbery> Hi folks. Welcome to PR Review club. Feel free to say hi!
17:00 < gzhao408> HI!!!!
17:00 < pinheadmz> hi
17:00 < emzy> hi
17:00 < robot-dreams> Hi
17:00 < Paul_R> hi everyone
17:00 < nehan> hi
17:00 < kimgnome> hi
17:00 < sosthene> hi!
17:00 < jnewbery> HI GZHAO!
17:00 < michaelfolkson> WHAT
17:00 < jnewbery> And let us know if it's your first time here. We love new participants.
17:00 < michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 < kimgnome> First time
17:00 < gzhao408> 😂
17:01 < jnewbery> welcome kimgnome!
17:01 < fjahr> hi
17:01 < jonatack> hi. i see some people are wide awake at this hour ;)
17:01 < kimgnome> Thanks
17:01 < unweave> hi
17:01 < jnewbery> Brief reminder of the format: I have some questions prepared that we'll go through, but feel free to jump in at any point. If you have a question, just ask at any time!
17:01 < sosthene> not really my first time, but it has been a while, a year I think :)
17:01 < dhruvm> hi
17:01 < Paul_R> also my first time
17:01 < jnewbery> welcome back sosthene :)
17:01 < jnewbery> welcome Paul_R
17:01 < Paul_R> thx
17:02 < jnewbery> other thing to remember: We're all here to learn, so there's no such thing as a stupid question.
17:02 < jonatack> great to see new people :D
17:02 < jnewbery> ok, let's get started!
17:02 < jnewbery> Notes and questions in the normal place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17977-3
17:02 < jnewbery> Who had a chance to review this week's commit? (y/n)
17:02 < pinheadmz> y
17:02 < gzhao408> y
17:02 < robot-dreams> y
17:02 < Paul_R> y
17:02 < emzy> n
17:02 < sosthene> n
17:02 < nehan> .5y
17:02 < jonatack> y
17:02 < fjahr> y
17:02 < jnewbery> wow that's a lot of review
17:02 < figs> y
17:02 < jnewbery> Any initial thoughts from those who reviewed it? Is it what you expected taproot to look like?
17:03 < robot-dreams> initial thoughts: I expected it'd be a really scary change about elliptic curves, but it turned out to be slightly more approachable and focused on soft forks :)
17:04 < jnewbery> robot-dreams: good! Yes, all the EC stuff is hidden away in libsecp
17:04 < gzhao408> It taught me about script upgradeability using witness versions 🤔was wondering, if there was another script upgrade we wanted to do using v2 for example, would it be incompatible with taproot?
17:04 < nehan> i am super confused and am looking forward to learning more about what's going on!
17:04 < pinheadmz> yeah its simpler than i expected -- checkTaprootCommitmenet in particualr, the way the control block is merkleized is a lot simpler than i imagined
17:05 < jnewbery> robot-dreams: probably good to review the last taproot PR review club to see how we use the new libsecp interface: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17977-2
17:05 < pinheadmz> gzhao408 v2 wouldnt be inompatible with taproot kinda like how taproot (v1) isnt incompatible with segwit v0
17:05 < pinheadmz> i mean, they are incompatible but they dont interfere with each other
17:06 < michaelfolkson> We are swimming in possible upgrade paths https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/96951/what-are-the-different-upgradeability-features-in-the-bip-taproot-bip-341-prop/96952#96952
17:06 < gzhao408> right, but if they had distinct features that were both really nice, would we be able to have both in the same script? or would there be a better way?
17:06 < unweave> pinheadmz would it be accurate to say "wouldn't *need to be* incompatible" ?
17:06 < pinheadmz> i see - well there are some logic in the code where its like (if WITNESSV0 || TAPROOT)
17:06 < pinheadmz> so you could add another (...|| V2) in there to share logic from taproot with v2
17:06 < gzhao408> my guess is no but I can't think of any concrete examples where it'd be necessary so 😅
17:07 < jnewbery> gzhao408: it's difficult for me to imagine something that abstract
17:07 < sosthene> But do we still need V2 anyway? :p
17:07 < jnewbery> but if there were eventually some segwit v2 I imagine it might have a superset of taproot's functionality maybe(?)
17:08 < pinheadmz> true also with leaf versions you could have a new script language inside a v1 taproot
17:08 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: yep, I expect you can do almost everything you want with script versions inside taproot
17:09 < michaelfolkson> It gets messy when you start wanting to take an old version (say 1) when you have a new version (say 2) and add new features to that old version to make say 3
17:09 < jnewbery> ok, first question: Will the new SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT and SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION script verification flags be used for consensus checks or policy checks?
17:09 < gzhao408> thanks for answering my question <jnewbery> <pinheadmz>, I'll think on it more - just want to feel out what the boundaries of compatibility are
17:09 < robot-dreams> I think `SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT` is for consensus: it might cause some blocks to be rejected
17:09 < robot-dreams> On the other hand, I think `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION` is for policy: it might prevent some transactions from being signed or added to the mempool, but it won't cause blocks to be rejected
17:09 < pinheadmz> robot-dreams i think youre right, and "DISCOURAGE..." anything is just policy
17:09 < gzhao408> +1 robot-dreams, and I wanna check my understanding of the DISCOURAGE flags, I think it’s: before, v1 would have been WITNESS_UNKNOWN, so no requirements… and now there are (stricter) defined taproot spending rules. So if we didn’t discourage, it’s possible for us to accept an old v1 to mempool, but then it wouldn’t pass consensus after the soft fork?
17:09 < gzhao408> yeah, discourage but not enforce
17:10 < gzhao408> er - enforce in block validation*
17:10 < pinheadmz> discourage means: reject from mempool, still valid in block
17:10 < jonatack> counterargument to sow doubt: the flags are in protocol.h
17:11 < gzhao408> pinheadmz 👍
17:11 < Paul_R> therefore it's a policy, not consensus rule
17:11 < Paul_R> @pin
17:11 < Paul_R> pinheadmz
17:11 < gzhao408> :jonatack: well, policy flags is a superset of consensus flags
17:11 < jonatack> gzhao408: stirring things up
17:11 < pinheadmz> and then you might see in the future say if ANNEX gets a function, that DISCOURAGE ANNEX will be removed and the new annex rules enforced by soft fork
17:11 < gzhao408> u jonatack i counteratack
17:12 < gzhao408> AND It’s not possible to add a script verification flag that makes spending rules less strict, right? i.e. they are all backwards compatible
17:12 < pinheadmz> less strict rules -> hard fork :-(
17:12 < jnewbery> jonatack: the flags are in script/interpreter.h
17:13 < jnewbery> gzhao408: yes, adding a new flag should only make things more strict
17:13 < gzhao408> I think jonatack is referring to the STANDARD_SCRIPT_VERIFY_FLAGS in policy.h
17:14 < jonatack> i wondered if the "answer" might be "both"
17:14 < robot-dreams> Yes, STANDARD_SCRIPT_VERIFY_FLAGS is in policy.h but I think it's also worth noting GetBlockScriptFlags
17:15 < jnewbery> my answer is: after the taproot softfork (however it gets activated), SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT will be a consensus rule
17:15 < jnewbery> SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION is intended to be a policy rule
17:15 < jnewbery> why do we discourage future taproot versions?
17:16 < michaelfolkson> Because they are unencumbered?
17:16 < sosthene> To discourage people using future versions while there are still not defined?
17:17 < robot-dreams> to communicate something like "this is a nonstandard transaction, don't do this"?
17:17 < pinheadmz> some of these policy rules are because they are anyone can spend, but a lot of policy rules are DDoS mitigation as well
17:17 < gzhao408> because... otherwise you might accept to mempool (if you didn't discourage in policy), and then there's a spending rule activated, and then it no longer passes consensus?
17:17 < gzhao408> (is that scenario possible?)
17:18 < pinheadmz> gzhao408 youd have to get the timing just right :-)
17:18 < gzhao408> <pinheadmz> couldn't it hang out in your mempool for a while if it was full?
17:18 < pinheadmz> get a tx in the mempool right on activation
17:18 < jnewbery> gzhao408: you certainly need to be careful around activation time with your mempool and propagating transactions
17:19 < pinheadmz> i wonder actually if the mempool evicts invalid txs on the edge of activation
17:19 < jnewbery> you're right that having a policy rule well in advance of activation prevents us from having this problem
17:19 < pinheadmz> I actually sent btc to a v1 address, that is an anyonecanspend output and its in the utxo set right now
17:19 < pinheadmz> someone could try to spend it on the block before taproot is enforced
17:19 < Paul_R> recently?
17:20 < pinheadmz> a few months ago, after bitcoin core eased the restriciton on DISCOURAGE UNKOWN WITNESS version
17:20 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: I don't think the mempool would do anything at activation time, but policy should mean that there aren't any of those transaction in there
17:21 < gzhao408> ! so at what point do we start applying SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADEABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION, would that theoretically be well before we start enforcing taproot in consensus?
17:21 < jnewbery> right, sending _to_ a v1 address is policy-valid. Spending _from_ v1 is policy-invalid
17:21 < pinheadmz> ah ok
17:21 < pinheadmz> what if a node / miner had requireStandard: false ?
17:21 < jnewbery> so someone could theoretically spend pinheadmz's output if they could get their transaction to a miner that isn't enforcing that policy
17:22 < jnewbery> but that transaction probably won't propogate through the network otherwise because it's policy-invalid for most nodes
17:22 < pinheadmz> but is there any chance that (lets say with standard: false) the spend enters a miner's mempool?
17:22 < pinheadmz> then the next block, taproot is enforecd
17:22 < pinheadmz> the mining code assumes the entire mempool is valid for the next block, i think ?
17:23 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: i believe you're right. So the miner needs to ensure that they're enforcing the new consensus rules on their mempool well before activation
17:23 < pinheadmz> interesting
17:23 < pinheadmz> theres no check mempool and evict function outside of a reorg ?
17:24 < Paul_R> jnewbery: are miner's generally this responsible?
17:24 < robot-dreams> this is for the miner's benefit, right? (they don't want to put in the work to mine a block and then have it be rejected cause of upgraded VERIFY rules)
17:24 < jnewbery> gzhao: SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGED_UPGRADEABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION would be enforced in policy from when taproot is activated
17:24 < gzhao408> <jnewbery> ohhh i see, thanks!
17:25 < unweave> >that transaction probably won't propogate [...] because it's policy-invalid   I've had transactions confirm that violated policy and I didn't put any extra effort into shepherding them to a miner FWIW
17:25 < jnewbery> Paul_R: if they're running Bitcoin Core then any v1 spends are already policy-invalid and not in their mempool
17:25 < jonatack> pinheadmz: i've wondered when/why someone would set -acceptnonstdtxn
17:25 < pinheadmz> p.s. https://blockstream.info/tx/b53e3bc5edbb41b34a963ecf67eb045266cf841cab73a780940ce6845377f141?input:0&expand
17:26 < pinheadmz> 5,431 free satoshis for someone
17:26 < jonatack> it's testing only
17:26 < jnewbery> unweave: interesting
17:26 < jnewbery> Next question (although feel free to continue asking questions about flags/policy if there's anything unanswered): What is the maximum permitted size of the control block?
17:27 < unweave> If I recall correctly, it was a txn which had sub 1 sat/byte fee rate
17:27 < michaelfolkson> 33+32*128
17:27 < jonatack> static_assert(TAPROOT_CONTROL_MAX_SIZE == 4129); // 33 + (32 * 128)
17:28 < jnewbery> unweave: that is interesting. Most nodes won't propogate transactions with a feerate under 1 sat/byte
17:28 < jnewbery> michaelfolkson jonatack: exactly
17:28 < jnewbery> that was an easy one though :)
17:28 < jnewbery> Next: What happens if a segwit v1 output has a witness program that isn’t 32 bytes? What happens if there’s a P2SH-wrapped segwit v1 output?
17:29 < pinheadmz> jnewbery these are unencumbered
17:29 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: yes!
17:29 < pinheadmz> although - there was the bech32 issue which could be mitigated if program length was more strictly enforced
17:29 < pinheadmz> lost track of that thread, i guess we are not doing anything about in taproot?
17:29 < robot-dreams> but I believe if the `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_WITNESS_PROGRAM` flag is set, we will fail validation for these cases
17:30 < jnewbery> bech32 is an address format. It doesn't impact consensus or validity of transactions.
17:30 < michaelfolkson> I had to look up what a control block is https://stackoverflow.com/questions/27216460/whats-a-control-block/27227335#27227335
17:30  * michaelfolkson shrugs
17:30 < pinheadmz> jnewbery yes but if we enforce v1 programs to be exactly 32 bytes then we can mitigate a user error where an address has extra qqqq's or whatever it was
17:31 < jnewbery> robot-dreams: right, exactly. So these transactions would be consensus valid, but would fail policy
17:31 < pinheadmz> robot-dreams good point
17:31 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: when you say "we enforce" are you talking about in the wallet software?
17:32 < pinheadmz> hm. i suppose yeah - but consensus doesn't allow witness v0 programs to be != 20 or 32
17:32 < pinheadmz> so even broken wallet software cant lose money sent to a v0 program with 33 bytes
17:33 < pinheadmz> a broken v1 wallet could, although tht point about policy i guess steps in there
17:33 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: yes, an OP_0 then a push that isn't 20 or 32 bytes is always invalid.
17:33 < Paul_R> Can a full-node be adversarial by not-listening to policy? could it then spread undesirable txs to miners & possibly blocks? will this nodes peers ban it?
17:34 < jnewbery> does anyone have any questions about 'P2SH-wrapped'?
17:34 < pinheadmz> Paul_R you cant force a peer to accept a tx. so *their* mempool polocy protects them, including miners
17:34 < jnewbery> Like for example "what is P2SH-wrapped?"? Does anyone have that question?
17:35 < robot-dreams> jnewbery: I do have a question, why don't we support that for Taproot?
17:35 < jnewbery> good question robot-dreams!
17:35 < robot-dreams> I'd imagine it'd be a convenient way to let legacy wallets pay to a new address
17:35 < jnewbery> anyone got a good answer for that?
17:35 < pinheadmz> i think its bc it turns into a complexity nightmare
17:35 < pinheadmz> nested was essential for the transition to segwit
17:36 < michaelfolkson> Because we were introducing bech32 right?
17:36 < pinheadmz> this just means that blockchain.com wallets cant send to taproot address :-P
17:37 < michaelfolkson> There is no new address format with Taproot
17:37 < pinheadmz> michaelfolkson right I mean, if you only want to accept taproot ouputs there is no address you can give to a legacy-legacy wallet
17:37 < pinheadmz> with segwit v0 you had the option of nested addresses
17:37 < michaelfolkson> So a P2SH wrapped Taproot won't be able to be spent
17:38 < jnewbery> Right exactly, bech32 has been around for several years, so there's nothing new for wallets to do to be able to send to a taproot output
17:38 < pinheadmz> michaelfolkson there's just no such thing
17:38 < pinheadmz> its anyone can spend
17:38 < jnewbery> https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2019-September/017307.html
17:38 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: exactly - it's unencumbered
17:38 < michaelfolkson> Ah ok
17:39 < nehan> what exactly does unencumbered mean?
17:39 < robot-dreams> Just confirming, "unencumbered" means it's a transaction output that anyone can figure out how to spend just by looking at it (no private keys / etc. neeeded)?
17:39 < robot-dreams> nehan: thanks for asking :)
17:39 < Paul_R> +1
17:39 < jnewbery> yes that. It's anyone-can-spend
17:40 < michaelfolkson> There's no reason for wanting P2SH wrapped Taproot as far as I know. Other than for avoiding mistakes with anyone can spend
17:40 < jnewbery> Of course, you'd need the preimage, so maybe unencumbered is maybe the wrong word
17:40 < jonatack> unencumbered by rules
17:40 < jnewbery> but if you have the preimage, it's anyone can spend (eg a miner could steal it from you if you created a transaction spending it)
17:41 < jnewbery> does that make sense nehan?
17:41 < nehan> jnewbery: yes thanks
17:41 < jonatack> unencumbered by s/rules/script validation rules/
17:42 < jnewbery> good! Everyone else happy with that? It's a little bit subtle
17:42 < michaelfolkson> encumber -to burden with obligations (dictionary)
17:42 < jnewbery> ok, next question: Explain this line: if (!(flags & SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT)) return set_success(serror);
17:43 < nehan> why are v1 outputs with lengths other than 32 bytes unencumbered instead of unspendable?
17:43 < michaelfolkson> For future upgradability
17:43 < sosthene> nehan: iirc, it is to allow them being used in the future
17:43 < nehan> ah, ok thanks!
17:43 < pinheadmz> yeah, an interesting design charactersitic of taproot is ALLL the upgradeablity
17:43 < jonatack> The bitwise AND of (flags & SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT) equalling 1 (true) means we need to verify SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT?
17:43 < jonatack> so if bitwise AND evaluates to 0 (false) then no need to verify and we can return with success
17:43 < robot-dreams> jnewbery: Taproot validation is a soft fork: if the VERIFY flag is not set, it's unencumbered (similar to legacy client behavior for P2SH and Segwit)
17:44 < pinheadmz> i think the authors might have felt like segwit v0 was too restricvitve perhaps, that theyd painted themself into a corner
17:44 < fjahr> Checks that the SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT flag is set for this script check. If not it skips verification and returns with success immediately.
17:44 < jnewbery> michaelfolkson sosthene: potentially, but it seems unlikely we'd ever use non-20/32-byte v1 outputs for anything
17:44 < michaelfolkson> No loss though right? If there is even a chance we might use them, keep them upgradable?
17:45 < michaelfolkson> Apart from anyone can spend mistakes by people playing around with this stuff
17:45 < jnewbery> michaelfolkson: is that any worse than unspendable?
17:45 < nehan> well, anyone can spend seems always better than unspendable
17:45 < sosthene> jnewbery: why?
17:46 < michaelfolkson> Fair point. If you put something with anyone can spend on the blockchain you aren't getting it back :)
17:46 < sosthene> I mean, it seems that last year there was discussion about the benefits of leaving this door open, but maybe there are other arguiments since I'm not aware of
17:46 < michaelfolkson> But you aren't getting it back if it is unspendable either so...
17:46  * michaelfolkson shrugs
17:46 < nehan> unspendable = money burnt forever
17:47 < michaelfolkson> anyone-can-spend = enter into a race with the entire Bitcoin world
17:47 < Paul_R> could someone create a 'chain-analysis' of sorts, to automatically detect unencumbered coins and sweep them?
17:47 < jnewbery> robot-dreams: that's right, if the flag isn't set, then a v1 segwit output is unencumbered
17:47 < jnewbery> Paul_R: I'm sure they already have
17:47 < unweave> michaelfolkson and yet as pinheadmz 's txn shows, it's a very slow race, no?
17:48 < Paul_R> because then it seems like there would be some parties competing to do so, which would be a weird industry... yeah pinheadmz shows it is a very slow race so far haha
17:48 < unweave> Paul_R this already happens with low entropy keys
17:48 < michaelfolkson> Oh no that actually is unspendable isn't it?
17:48 < pinheadmz> that and as discussed, policy rejects spending from anyonecanspend
17:48 < pinheadmz> so itd have to be a clever miner
17:48 < michaelfolkson> Wasn't that a Taproot output?
17:48 < michaelfolkson> Before Taproot is activated?
17:48 < pinheadmz> and yes, the taproot address i used is just 32 0x01 bytes -- so this output is actually UNSPENDABLE once taproot activates!
17:49 < pinheadmz> (bc there is no private key for that witness program)
17:49 < Paul_R> pinheadmz all for 5000sats // .50 euros
17:49 < unweave> ah I think I misunderstood
17:49 < unweave> :)
17:49 < jnewbery> Final question: What error is given if VerifyTaprootCommitment() fails? Why?
17:49 < michaelfolkson> Oh there's that too pinheadmz but it is currently unspendable now too right?
17:49 < pinheadmz> witness program mismatch
17:50 < pinheadmz> this is the function that checks that the control block crap and witness data match the output, aka witness program aka the adress coin is sent to
17:50 < pinheadmz> oops didnt mean to type crap
17:50 < michaelfolkson> banned
17:50 < jonatack> no more review club for you
17:50 < jnewbery> :shocked:
17:50 < pinheadmz> damn
17:51 < pinheadmz> starting my own ##PR-club-with-cuss-words
17:51 < robot-dreams> This means the witness program (Schnorr public key) didn't commit to the Merkle root demonstrated by the script
17:51 < fjahr> michaelfolkson: it's not really a race between the entire bitcoin world though, only the question which miner mines the next block. If you send a miner a anyonecanspend why would they mine it for you? They will just replace it with their own tx.
17:51 < robot-dreams> (though I don't yet know the mechanism by which a Schnorr public key commits to a hash)
17:51  * michaelfolkson checks code of conduct
17:52 < jnewbery> but yes, it's the function that checks that the witness program has commited to the witness, so if it fails, then it's a witness program mismatch
17:53 < jnewbery> ok, we have a few minutes left. Did anyone have any other questions or observations they wanted to share?
17:53 < unweave> [off topic] Paul_R see this presentation for examples of automated sweeping of low-entropy bitcoin funds https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foil0hzl4Pg "DEF CON 23 - Ryan Castellucci - Cracking CryptoCurrency Brainwallets"
17:53 < Paul_R> unweave thx!
17:54 < michaelfolkson> Yeah I guess its worse than I said. Race in which you can only win if miner is dumb
17:54 < robot-dreams> to followup on P2SH wrapping:
17:54 < robot-dreams> was the conclusion "we're not going to support this because the benefit (allowing very old wallets to send to a taproot output) isn't worth the multitude of added complexity, privacy implications, etc."?
17:56 < jnewbery> robot-dreams: yes, those are good arguments against
17:57 < jnewbery> I argued against it here: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2019-May/016943.html because I think the benefits of allowing P2SH-wrapped segwit v0 don't apply any more
17:57 < jnewbery> ok, just about time to wrap up. Any final thoughts? How are y'all enjoying taproot review?
17:57 < jonatack> we lost gzhao408
17:58 < Paul_R> that was a great first experience, thanks everyone
17:58 < Paul_R> i wish i had come sooner
17:58  * gzhao408 was afk because of work meeting
17:58 < robot-dreams> very exciting taproot review, this was a great entry point into "what is taproot"
17:58 < michaelfolkson> I'd like to suggest added comments to Taproot PR but I guess it isn't a good time
17:58 < jnewbery> ok, let's call it. Thanks everyone. See you all next week!
17:58 < sosthene> thanks, that was very interesting
17:59 < gzhao408> jnewbery i am loving taproot review, script is very exciting stuff
17:59 < jonatack> Paul_R: great 🚀
17:59 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
