---
layout: pr
date: 2020-10-14
title: "Implement BIP 340-342 validation - Implement Tapscript script validation rules (BIP 342)"
pr: 19953
authors: [sipa]
components: ["consensus", "taproot"]
host: jnewbery
status: upcoming
commit: 07dd29e1b5
---

This is the sixth in [a series of review club
meetings](./meetings-components/#taproot) on the implementation of BIP 340-342. 

This week we'll look at another commit from the taproot PR (PR 19953) -
_[Implement Tapscript script validation rules (BIP
342)](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/805a79ab)_.

## Notes

- The schnorr/taproot softfork proposal contains:

  - A new signature scheme (schnorr signatures), defined in [BIP 340](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki)
  - A new way to commit to a script or tree of scripts embedded within a public key (taproot), defined in [BIP 341](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki)
  - A new scripting language (tapscript), defined in [BIP 342](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0342.mediawiki)

  This week, we're looking at the implementation of tapscript. You should read
  the specification of BIP 342 before reviewing the code, and keep a copy handy
  while you review to make sure that the implementation matches the
  specification.

- Tapscript has almost identical script semantics to [those defined in BIP
  141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#New_script_semantics)
  for P2WSH spends, which themselves are almost identical to the semantics for
  pre-segwit script.

- The main differences between tapscript and P2WSH semantics are:

  - BIP 340 schnorr signature validation is used for all `OP_CHECKSIG` and
    `OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY` evaluation, with a new signature hash
    (observe the data input to the _Verify_ function in the [signature validation algorithm](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0342.mediawiki#signature-validation)).
  - `OP_CHECKMULTISIG` and `OP_CHECKMULTISIGVERIFY` are disabled, with their
    functionality replaced by `OP_CHECKSIGADD`.
  - Certain opcodes are redefined to mean `OP_SUCCESS` and cause validation to succeed immediately.
  - `MINIMALIF` becomes a consensus rule.

- Almost all of the new code in this commit is in the
  [src/script/interpreter.cpp
  file](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/805a79ab#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3),
  inside the `EvalScript()` interpreter, the `EvalChecksig()` signature
  verification code, and the `ExecuteWitnessScript()` and
  `VerifyWitnessProgram()` functions. 

## Questions

### Specification

1. What additional data does the signature hash commit to, compared to P2WPKH
   and P2WSH signatures? Hint: you'll need to look at the _SigMsg()_ and
   _tapleaf hash_ definitions in BIP 341. You may also want to review the
   review club notes from [the session on taproot signature hashing](./17977).

2. Why are `OP_CHECKMULTISIG` and `OP_CHECKMULTISIGVERIFY` disabled in
   tapscript? How can you implement a multisig scheme in segwit v1?

3. What is the purpose of the new `OP_SUCCESS` opcodes? How does their
   functionality differ from `OP_NOP` in pre-segwit and P2WSH script?

4. Why is MINIMALIF a consensus rule in tapscript?

### Implementation

1. `EvalChecksig()` (and the functions it calls) have both a return value and
   a `success` out parameter. What are those two values used for? Under what
   circumstances can a signature validation fail, but script execution
   succeed?

2. Why does the `MAX_SCRIPT_SIZE` limit [not apply to tapscript](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/805a79ab#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R452)?

3. Why is the [script interpreter
   loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/805a79ab#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R463)
   changed from a while loop to a for loop? What is the variable `opcode_pos` used
   for?

4. Is `nOpCount` used during tapscript evaluation? Why/why not?

5. What happens if a tapscript contains an `OP_CHECKSIG`, `OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY`
   or `OP_CHECKSIGADD` with a public key that isn't a 32 byte array? Where is
   that behaviour specified in the BIPs? Where is it implemented in the code?

6. What happens if a tapscript contains an `OP_CHECKSIG`, `OP_CHECKSIGVERIFY`
   or `OP_CHECKSIGADD` with an empty signature? Where is that behaviour
   specified in the BIPs? Where is it implemented in the code?

7. Why are stack size limits [checked inside
   ExecuteWitnessScript()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/805a79ab#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1810-R1813)?

<!-- TODO: After meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags
## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
{% endirc %}
-->
