---
layout: pr
date: 2020-02-26
title: "Try to preserve outbound block-relay-only connections during restart"
pr: 17428
authors: [hebasto]
components: ["p2p"]
host: amitiuttarwar
status: past
commit: 78b2f9503
---

## Notes

An _eclipse attack_ is when an attacker is able to isolate a node from all honest
peers.

This PR seeks to mitigate a specific type of eclipse attack by introducing
anchor connections, which are peers that a node tries to reconnect to on
startup.

### Background

- [PR 15759](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15759) changed the
  peer-to-peer behavior to add two _blocks-only_ connections. We discussed
  this change in a [previous Review Club
  meeting](https://bitcoincore.reviews/15759.html). I recommend you read
  the notes, questions and meeting log from that meeting if you're not
  already familiar with those changes.

- [Eclipse attacks](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/) occur
  when an adversary is able to isolate a victim's node from the rest of the
  network. We discussed eclipse attacks in previous Review Club meetings,
  including [the discussion on PR
  16702](https://bitcoincore.reviews/16702.html). If you're unfamiliar with the
  concept of eclipse attacks, [the Optech topics page](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/) and the notes from that
  meeting contain links to many resources on the subject.

- A _restart-based eclipse attack_ occurs when the adversary is able to add its
  own addresses to the victim's address manager and then force the victim to
  restart. If the attack succeeds, the victim will make all of its connections
  to the adversary's addresses when it restarts.

- [Issue 17326](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17326) proposed
  persisting the node's outbound connection list to disk, and on restart
  reconnecting to the same peers. It's worth reading the full discussion in
  that issue, since there are a lot of subtle points around which peers
  should be persisted.

- This PR, [PR 17428](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428) adds
  functionality to preserve outbound block-relay-only connections during
  restart.

### Issue 17326

- The most likely way for an eclipse attack to occur is by forcing a victim
  to restart and then making it connect only to malicious peers.

- In the 2015 implementation of Bitcoin Core, an attacker could carry out a
  "connection starvation attack". In this attack, the adversary fills up
  all of the available inbound connections on the network and then forces
  the victim to reboot. When the victim restarts, he's unable to connect to
  any honest peers on the network since their inbound connections slots are
  all filled up. Since anchor connections only help identify honest peers, not
  connect to them, they are not an effective mitigation strategy against such an
  attack.

- Since then, Bitcoin Core has implemented logic to sometimes rotate through
  incoming connections when the max number is hit. This means the victim has a
  way to successfully evict an attacker's connections to honest peers and
  reconnect to those honest peers.  While this means that it's possible for an
  attacker to eclipse a node without it rebooting, it also makes carrying out the
  eclipse attack more complex.

- Reconnecting to the same outgoing connections on restart makes the network graph more static. While
  this helps maintain longstanding honest connections and prevent an eclipse
  attack, this can have a negative effect on privacy since the network topology
  is easier to map.

- There are some other reasons that we might not want to anchor all connections:

    1. A victim of an eclipse attack has no way of escaping if all of his connections
       are anchored to the adversary.
    2. Strong persistence can contribute to the network self-partitioning. For
       example, if the longer distance connections are less reliable, nodes are
       incentivized to connect locally and this could lead to subgraphs per continent.
    3. An attacker could eclipse nodes with a small number of nodes but 100% uptime
       and a large capacity for inbound connections. Every time a node adds a
       connection to a new peer, if that peer is an adversary then it would be "locked in"
       forever with anchoring logic.

- The suggestion of using blocks-relay-only peers mitigates the concerns around
  reduced outbound peer rotation negatively impacting transaction privacy,
  while maintaing the benefit of mitigating from an eclipse attack.

### PR 17428

- The 2 outbound block-relay-only connections are written to the `anchors.dat`
  file. When a node restarts, it first tries establishing connections with the
  anchors before attempting to connect to other peers.

- Previously, a node that would quickly reattempt the same outgoing connections
  was detected as a spy or mass connector. The new behavior in this PR means that honest
  nodes will attempt the same outgoing connections more than once, which was
  unlikely before.

- The current state of this implementation introduces a new risk -- if one of the
  anchor peers is malicious and is able to exploit a remote crash vulnerability, they
  can repeatedly crash the victim's node. Every time the victim node restarts,
  it would connect to the same malicious anchor peer, which could force another
  remote crash.

  The proposed fix is to forget the anchor peers on an unclean exit.

  In reaction to these findings, the PR was [closed](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428#issuecomment-583737058).
  The PR has subsequently been reopened since there are still advantages to
  preserving connections when restarting a node. The implementation of the
  proposed fix is yet to come.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PRs? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
(Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What is an eclipse attack?
  - How does an adversary eclipse a node?
  - What attacks can an adversary execute on the victim?
  - How does this PR mitigate the attack? What are some limitations of the proposed fix?

3. How does the anchors.dat file work?
  - When are peers persisted and removed?
  - When does the node ignore the contents of anchors.dat?
  - What are some implications of the timing of adding peers?

4. What are the conditions for adding an anchor?
  - Why do we only consider adding blocks-only peers as anchor peers?
  - What would be the issue of using normal (transaction & block relay) peers
    as anchors?
  - What are limitations of how this implementation chooses anchors?
  - Why limit to only 2 anchors?

5. With the current implementation of this PR, how could an adversary carry out
   an attack? How is this different from what an attacker would have to do
   currently?

6. What is the new risk that this implementation currently introduces? What are
   the tradeoffs of the proposed fix (yet to be implemented)? Do you think the
   changeset would still be worthwhile? Why?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
13:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
13:00 < amiti> jnewbery you beat me to it!
13:00 < rockzombie2> hi
13:00 < pinheadmz> hi!
13:00 < hebasto> hi
13:00 < amiti> hi everyone! welcome to this weeks PR review club
13:00 < pbleam> hi
13:00 < nothingmuch> ohai
13:00 < _andrewtoth_> hi
13:00 < lightlike> hi
13:00 < nehan_> hi
13:00 < audichya> hi
13:00 < ecurrencyhodler> hello
13:00 < jnewbery> hi
13:01 < amiti> I had a lot of fun digging into this PR & problem space and think we have lots to talk about :)
13:01 < luke-jr> hi
13:01 < emzy> hi
13:01 < rockzombie2> I have a question: Can someone give a quick explanation of what an eclipse attack is?
13:01 < embark> hi
13:01 < amiti> who got the chance to review this weeks PR?
13:01 < ajonas> hi
13:01 < amiti> can we do a quick round of y/n?
13:02 < embark> rockzombie2 Did you see the notes for the review? https://bitcoincore.reviews/17428.html attack is described there
13:02 < pinheadmz> y
13:02 < hebasto> rockzombie2: every node you are connected are evel
13:02 < hebasto> *evil*
13:03 < emzy> n
13:03 < lightlike> yes
13:03 < nehan_> y
13:03 < _andrewtoth_> 0.5y
13:03 < amiti> haha rockzombie2 that was exactly how I was planning to start the conversation =P
13:03 < rockzombie2> Oh my bad. I was looking at the notes linked in the previous PR club meeting
13:03 < rockzombie2> I didn't really get to look at the PR tbh
13:03 < nothingmuch> 0.3y
13:04 < amiti> continuing on the idea of eclipse attacks, can someone describe how an adversary would eclipse a node?
13:04 < luke-jr> I'd like an example that doesn't require MITM, since MITM is unmitigatable..
13:04 < pinheadmz> tldr - fill up their addr list with addrs the attacker owns, then forcing them to restart somehow
13:04 < pinheadmz> the victim will create outbounds to only the attackers nodes
13:05 < amiti> pinheadmz: yup! although one nuance is you don't need to force them to restart, alternatively you could wait for them to restart
13:05 < _andrewtoth_> but how do they do the first part - "fill up their addr list with addrs the attacker owns"?
13:05 < rockzombie2> ^
13:05 < luke-jr> that seems like the real flaw :P
13:06 < pinheadmz> bitcoin nodes send each other addr packets all the time - actually does anyone know if they are allowed ot be unsolicited?
13:06 < nehan_> Ethan explains here eclipse attacks don't require restarts? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17326#issuecomment-548410548
13:06 < pinheadmz> or are they only supposed ot be served in rsponse to getaddr or something
13:06 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: yes, I believe they can be unsolicited
13:06 < amiti> _andrewtoth_: I'm curious to learn more about this too. the addrman is populated based on addr messages received, but I'm unfamiliar with the exact logic of how
13:07 < amiti> nehan_: great point. since there is peer rotation logic, its possible for adversaries to take over an addrman without the victim restarting
13:08 < amiti> pinheadmz: but there's also the case where a victim has one malicious connection, and then receives solicited addr messages and then over time the adversary poisons the addrman and takes over all the connections
13:08 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: I believe https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2bdc476d4d23256d8396bb9051a511f540d87392/src/net_processing.cpp#L3607 is where we'll send unsolicited ADDRs to our peers
13:08 < rockzombie2> How successful would an eclipse attack be? because ultimately, wouldn't the attacker need to do a 51% attack on the whole network before the "eclipsed" node realizes they are not on the main chain?
13:09 < amiti> ok, so if a node is eclipsed, what sort of attacks can an adversary execute on the victim?
13:09 < rockzombie2> they could convince the node to empty their wallet?
13:09 < amiti> can anyone answer rockzombie2's question and explain why eclipse attacks don't require 51% attacks?
13:09 < pinheadmz> ha
13:10 < ecurrencyhodler> amiti: Serve malicious blocks with double spends in them.
13:10 < pinheadmz> well it still takes a lot of hashpower to find a block
13:10 < embark> rockzombie2 and EA is at the P2P level not at consensus or miner level
13:11 < pinheadmz> but with the rest of the network blocked, the attacker can take as long as they want
13:11 < embark> s/and/an
13:11 < pbleam> won
13:11 < amiti> embark: what is EA?
13:11 < lightlike> if the eclipsed node is a miner, it won't use their computing power for anything useful.
13:11 < pbleam> won't that look suspicious if the attacker takes especially long to serve a new block?
13:11 < ecurrencyhodler> rockzomebie2: You only need enough hashpower to find a block to serve a malicious one. If your node is eclipsed, then they can take their sweet time generating the block.
13:11 < embark> amiti: my attempt at being lazy :P Eclipse Attack (EA)
13:11 < _andrewtoth_> the blocks wouldn't really be malicious with double spends, they would still have to be valid blocks, but they would be on a lower proof of work chain
13:11 < pinheadmz> pbleam: actually yes and there is already mitigations  like "if i havent seen a block in a while, make an additional outbound connection"
13:12 < ecurrencyhodler> _andrewth_: thanks for the clarification.
13:12 < pinheadmz> but if all your outbound connections are to attackers, this wont help
13:12 < embark> lightlike good point,  an Eclipse Attack'ed peer can eventually be fed low PoW blocks and will accept them as valid
13:12 < embark> too
13:13 < jnewbery> embark: no. The blocks need to be the right difficulty
13:13 < nothingmuch> embark: can you clarify eventually? do you mean including difficulty adjustment?
13:13 < ecurrencyhodler> pbleam: it depends on how long is a long time. Sometimes it's taken an hour to find a block.
13:13 < lightlike> embark: I just meant less competition for the people actually mining on the main chain
13:13 < embark> jnewbery: I eclipse you for 4 weeks (unlikely to suceed but a possibility) you will start to accept difficulty discounted blocks, no?
13:14 < amiti> there's a lot of different attacks possible on an eclipsed node... I found the notes on the optech topics page interesting for highlighting some at the txn level that I hadn't thought about: https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/eclipse-attacks/
13:14 < embark> actually I probably need to retract that
13:14 < nothingmuch> embark: no, difficulty adjustment is triggered by block height, not nominal time
13:14 < pinheadmz> embark: no yore right i think, there is the chain-width attack. starting from an old block, the attacker creates a dsihonest chain with fake timestamps that force the difficulty down
13:14 < embark> yes I retract
13:15 < embark> I was....uhh.. testing people... ha
13:15 < amiti> ok moving on, how does this PR mitigate an eclipse attack?
13:15 < pinheadmz> although hm that wouldnt force a reorg though huh
13:15 < ajonas> I think the LN attack is pretty worrisome
13:16 < jnewbery> embark: yes, theoretically if you can eclipse a node over a difficulty retarget, you could decrease the difficulty for their retarget, but you'd still need to do a lot of work to get to that difficulty retarget height. I feel like we're getting a little in the weeds of an unlikely and very expensive attack though
13:16 < amiti> ajonas: I agree!
13:16 < pinheadmz> amiti: by saving the addr of two peers to disk, then on restart, reconnecting to them instead of picking addrs from the list that might belong to an attacker
13:16 < rockzombie2> the PR preserves the list of nodes you were connected to before? Making it less likely for an EA
13:16 < embark> jnewbery yes not the most important facet to focus on, I say we continue
13:16 < amiti> yup! it introduces the idea of "anchor" connections
13:17 < amiti> I'm going to jump to question #4 and then loop back to #3
13:17 < amiti> can someone explain what the conditions are for adding anchors ?
13:17 < pinheadmz> outbound connections that are block-relay only ?
13:18 < pinheadmz> and also ~fFeeler ... whcih idk what that is
13:18 < pinheadmz> !fFeeler
13:18 < amiti> pinheadmz: yup, we treat the last successful outbound block-relay-only connections as our anchors when we restart
13:19 < ecurrencyhodler> What happens when an attackers node is saved? Doesn't that keep them stuck in that connection?
13:19 < rockzombie2> It doesn't sound like it. If the anchor is the *last* successful outbound block-relay-only connection
13:19 < amiti> when we get a message about new addresses, feelers are a way of testing out those connections and then moving them to a "tried" table if they were successful. this prevents us from filling up our address tables with bogus info
13:20 < ecurrencyhodler> very cool
13:20 < embark> so feeler = assess candidate peer?
13:20 < amiti> ecurrencyhodler: great question! this is a point that has been discussed in the PR conversation. lets defer for a few minutes and come back to it
13:20 < pinheadmz> amiti: so those feeler connections arent sustained? jsut a quick test and hangup?
13:20 < ecurrencyhodler> okay thanks
13:21 < amiti> embark, pinheadmz: yes thats my understanding
13:21 < lightlike> mine too: just connect to see if it's there.
13:21 < amiti> ok so can anyone explain why the anchors are blocks-only peers?
13:22 < amiti> and similarly, what would be the issue of using normal (txn + block relay) peers as anchors?
13:23 < embark> Maybe: If a node only uses outbound connections it increasing the costs an eclipse attacker would need to marshal to shunt the node to their nodes
13:23 < nehan_> anchors are a bit dangerous if you get stuck with evil anchors. and the real issue with being eclipsed is not seeing new blocks, transactions are less concerning. but i don't see why it couldn't be txn+block connections as well...
13:23 < nehan_> as long as the number is limited
13:24 < pinheadmz> the blocks-only peers dont relay addr messages?
13:24 < amiti> ok, so if we step back and look at the network graph as a whole, adding anchor connections makes the network graph more static
13:25 < amiti> can anyone think of why that would not be desirable?
13:25 < _andrewtoth_> it makes topology inference easier
13:25 < ajonas> It helps maintain honest/trustworthy connections
13:25 < pinheadmz> privacy, trace the origin of a TX
13:26 < rockzombie2> It sounds like it could centralize the network towards nodes that have been around longer
13:26 < ajonas> oh NOT
13:26 < amiti> _andrewtoth_: and why is topology inference undesirable?
13:26 < ajonas> the opposite
13:26 < amiti> pinheadmz: exactly
13:26 < embark> generally dynamic systems that don't have noise/randomness can converge to states that are suboptimal
13:26 < nehan_> oh is it an attempt to reduce the privacy implications? blocks-only connections leak less information, so it's ok to keep them around longer?
13:26 < amiti> ajonas: well, you highlight the dissonant objectives
13:26 < embark> Eg "Noise can speed convergence in Markov chains" http://sipi.usc.edu/~kosko/Physical-Review-Noisy-Markov-Chain-Oct2011.pdf
13:26 < ajonas> that's what I'm here for
13:26 < luke-jr> embark: but in this case, it has a history of working, even if suboptimal
13:27 < luke-jr> and the anchors aren't ALL your peers
13:27 < amiti> so basically, for txn privacy you want the topology to be obscured and the network to be dynamic
13:27 < amiti> but if your connections are frequently changing, its easier to be eclipsed
13:27 < amiti> so this is a fundamental point about the implementation of this PR
13:27 < _andrewtoth_> here's a good summary from hebasto https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/17326#issuecomment-550337452
13:28 < amiti> by using blocks-relay-only connections, you are avoiding the privacy leak of anchoring your transaction-relay connections
13:28 < amiti> but getting the benefits of added protection from being eclipsed
13:28 < ecurrencyhodler> wow
13:29 < ecurrencyhodler> amiti: makes a lot of sense.
13:29 < embark> e.g. the choice is more about node's txn relay privacy than mitigating an EA?
13:29 < _andrewtoth_> it's about finding a good balance between the two competing objectives I believe
13:29 < amiti> ok, lets jump back to the topic that ecurrencyhodler brought up earlier. what happens if you chose a malicious node as an anchor?
13:29 < luke-jr> in  theory, by having both anchor peers and dynamic peers, we get the best of both
13:30 < luke-jr> amiti: that's the problem
13:30 < embark> given EA mitigation, how do we mitigate second order detriments?
13:30 < amiti> luke-jr pointed out this risk in the PR
13:30 < amiti> would you like to explain the concern?
13:30 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: to answer your previous question about blocks-only peers, no we don't relay addrs: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2bdc476d4d23256d8396bb9051a511f540d87392/src/net.cpp#L2681
13:31 < luke-jr> if a peer has a way to crash your node,  right now, you can have a script that just restarts it automatically
13:31 < pinheadmz> jnewbery: thanks youre fast! i was trying to find this in #15759
13:31 < luke-jr> chances are you won't reconnect to the malicious peer
13:31 < luke-jr> but if we have an anchor, the peer can keep crashing you indefinitely
13:31 < lightlike> you will stay connected to evil anchors forever (unless they disconnect), and they know it because all blocks-only connections will be anchors.
13:31 < luke-jr> possibly causing you to not continue syncing and retain a stale state, for one example
13:31 < ecurrencyhodler> luke-jr: How can they crash your node?
13:32 < luke-jr> ecurrencyhodler: that would require a different vulnerability too
13:32 < ecurrencyhodler> Ah okay.
13:32 < amiti> so did anyone catch what the proposed fix is?
13:32 < luke-jr> not an uncommon type
13:32 < pinheadmz> I thought part of this PR was to record a "dirty" shutdown so if a node crashed it would NOT use the same anchors
13:32 < ecurrencyhodler> I remember reading about parity nodes crashing because they were served invalid blocks. Is that an example?
13:32 < luke-jr> amiti: last I saw, proposed fix was to drop anchors on crash
13:33 < amiti> yup.
13:33 < luke-jr> ecurrencyhodler: probably
13:33 < _andrewtoth_> that proposed fix is not yet implemented afaict
13:33 < amiti> hebasto: what are your current thoughts about the PR?
13:33 < amiti> _andrewtoth_: correct
13:33 < hebasto> amiti: If your node is remote crashable, you want to fix it pretty quickly anyway...
13:34 < ecurrencyhodler> So the assumption is that if your node crashes, one reason is because it was crashed remotely on purpose. So now your node will look for new anchor outputs.
13:34 < ecurrencyhodler> anchors*.
13:34 < nehan_> which means it becomes susceptible to restart-based eclipse attacks again.
13:35 < amiti> ecurrencyhodler: yes, thats the proposed fix
13:35 < nehan_> at least you required the eclipse attacker to also figure out how to crash the node uncleanly
13:35 < pinheadmz> nehan_: yeah remote execution of `bitcoin-cli stop` would be bad
13:35 < amiti> nehan_: pretty much, but one thing I learned from hebasto's comment here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428#issuecomment-591449881 is the two types of restart-based eclipse attacks
13:36 < amiti> so yes, if we wipe anchors on unclean restarts, then we are vulnerable to some of those attacks but protected against others
13:36 < hebasto> yup ^^
13:36 < nehan_> amiti: thanks!
13:37 < nehan_> hebasto: power failures are clean shut downs?
13:37 < hebasto> nehan_: no!
13:37 < amiti> but in the existing implementation (use anchors for unclean restarts as well), we would not be able to start our node in the worst case scenario
13:38 < nothingmuch> currently it seems that DumpAnchors is called eagerly. an alternative would be to only save on clean shutdown, but that is problematic if the user never restarts.
13:38 < pbleam> power failures are unclean but hopefully not as repeatable as remote shutdowns?
13:38 < nothingmuch> i'm curious what peoples' thoughts on the right balance might be
13:38 < rockzombie2> yeah, why does the current PR implementation work well against power failures?
13:38 < luke-jr> nothingmuch: losing anchors isn't particularly problematic
13:38 < nothingmuch> and how easy it is for evil anchors to game
13:38 < _andrewtoth_> nothingmuch I believe the fix is to not use what was written when restarting uncleanly
13:38 < nehan_> hebasto: then I think your comment is incorrect... it looks (to me) like it claims it helps with an eclipse attacker who can cause a power shutdown to do a restart. it does not, because that is an unclean restart, so the anchors would be wiped.
13:38 < amiti> I've been thinking about this.. and I wonder if its desirable to be able to start your node if you're the victim of an eclipse attack? I think I'd rather not be able to start up because that would force me to figure out what's wrong
13:39 < luke-jr> nehan_: anchors resist the eclipse
13:39 < amiti> curious what other reviewers think about that, as well as hebasto & luke-jr
13:39 < nehan_> luke-jr: yes. and with a power shutdown, the anchor file would be wiped, so it would not help resist an eclipse attack
13:39 < hebasto> nehan_: current implementation, without a suggested fix, will do
13:39 < lightlike> nehan_: i believe hebasto was suggesting not to implement this feature of wiping during unclean restarts.
13:39 < luke-jr> amiti: being unable to start is a different attack than eclipse
13:39 < nehan_> lightlike: ah ok, thanks
13:40 < nehan_> lightlike: _not_ wiping works well against an EA adversary. yes.
13:40 < luke-jr> also, the worst-case scenario isn't inability to restart: it's being prevented from syncing because your node is killed too quickly, but not until RPC calls are made
13:41 < amiti> luke-jr: right. the two options of implementation are 1. use anchors on every restart & 2. use anchors only on clean restarts. #1 has the issue you pointed out where the node is unable to function. #2 has less protection under an eclipse attack. right?
13:41 < luke-jr> amiti: right
13:41 < amiti> ok good point. I should say unable to sync instead of unable to start
13:41 < luke-jr> under certain eclipse attacks
13:41 < emzy> Maybe have a counter. And wipe the anchors after lets say 5 restarts/crashes.
13:42 < hebasto> luke-jr: in the worst case we find out remote crash vulnerability and will fix it, I hope
13:42 < luke-jr> hebasto: sure, we have in the past
13:42 < amiti> so, the question I'm floating is ... which is more desirable? to me, #1 seems to make more sense because I wouldn't want to be able to operate if I'm eclipsed anyways
13:42 < luke-jr> emzy: if the EA can kill power, they can do it 5 times
13:42 < amiti> does that make sense?
13:43 < luke-jr> amiti: no
13:43 < luke-jr> EAs are theoretical; node-crashing vulns are common in practice
13:43 < luke-jr> (power-based EAs are theoretical *and* unlikely)
13:43 < emzy> luke-jr: but after the 5. time I don't use the anchor anymore. So it limits the attack
13:43 < amiti> ok gotcha
13:44 < nehan_> emzy: no, it enables the restart-based eclipse attack
13:44 < luke-jr> emzy: the power-cycling attack is EA; it BENEFITS from you dropping the anchor
13:44 < nothingmuch> amiti: i think there are more options (what i meant to imply by my question). for example the anchor file could be a write ahead log with commitments on successful restarts so that it's not all or nothing
13:44 < luke-jr> emzy: if they just want to DoS, they will simpoly leave the power off :P
13:44 < amiti> hebasto: what are you thinking for the next steps for this PR?
13:45 < emzy> nehan_: luke-jr: Ok. I understand the problem.
13:45 < amiti> nothingmuch: thats true, there could be more complex anchor logic
13:45 < nothingmuch> hence my question above - i'm not sure sensible lead time from an outbound block only seeming non malicious, but my intuition is that it should not depend on the user's restart habits
13:45 < nothingmuch> amiti: fwiw not an actual suggestion, just an extreme hypothetical
13:45 < luke-jr> https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Common_Vulnerabilities_and_Exposures
13:46 < hebasto> applying suggested fix will make pr scope significantly smaller, but it seems still useful
13:46 < luke-jr> almost all the "DoS" category are node crashers
13:46 < luke-jr> to get a sense of how common this is
13:46 < amiti> hebasto: I agree.
13:47 < amiti> ok, are people interested in continuing with the questions?
13:47 < amiti> lets take a look at the implementation (question #3)
13:47 < embark> even if the attack isn't common or known, we know it's possibly so we don't want to enable an attack vector with design choices that deny its possibility
13:48 < amiti> in the current implementation, whats the logic for how peers are persisted and removed?
13:50 < jnewbery> they're persisted in the DumpAnchors() function
13:50 < amiti> nothingmuch: you alluded to it before :) whats the method that adds peers to the anchors.dat?
13:51 < nothingmuch> i was rereading to verify my understanding
13:51 < amiti> jnewbery: yup!
13:51 < nothingmuch> but i think DumpAnchors is done after a successful handshake with a blocks only outgoing peer
13:51 < amiti> nothingmuch: yup! thats my understanding too
13:51 < jnewbery> (which is called in the ProcessMessage() function in net_processing
13:51 < nothingmuch> and that in turn saves all of the outgoing blocks only peers based on the current addrman state
13:51 < amiti> for anyone wondering, here's where that happens: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428/files#diff-eff7adeaec73a769788bb78858815c91R2136
13:52  * luke-jr , before running out of time, wonders if anchors should be reduced/skipped entirely if the user has manually configured addnode peers
13:53 < amiti> luke-jr: interesting point, can you explain that further? what are the tradeoffs you see?
13:53 < jnewbery> luke-jr: can you quickly summarise what addnode peers are?
13:53 < luke-jr> addnode peers are typically permanent connections to other known nodes
13:53 < nothingmuch> those count against outbound connection limit, right?
13:53 < luke-jr> seems to be a manual anchor in practice IMO
13:53 < luke-jr> I don't think they do, but I forget
13:54 < nothingmuch> hmm. if they don't what is the downside of having both anchors and manually added connections?
13:54 < luke-jr> I'm not sure if there is a downside, just thinking it might make sense to disable automatic anchors if we have user-provided anchors
13:54 < hebasto> luke-jr: will the only -addnode sufficient for not using anchors?
13:54 < luke-jr> hebasto: ?
13:55 < hebasto> maybe require two or more manually added nodes?
13:55 < luke-jr> hebasto: hence "reduce" :P
13:55 < luke-jr> hebasto: ie, if there's 1 addnode, make <defalt>-1 auto anchors
13:55 < luke-jr> s/make/load/
13:55 < amiti> time check: we have 5 more minutes remaining. does anyone have any questions?
13:56 < hebasto> luke-jr: great!
13:56 < pinheadmz> I feel queasy about the anchor peers - im not convinced that an eclipse-attacker couldnt use it against a victim
13:56 < luke-jr> it might or might not be worth the extra logic to do this - perhaps better to save for another PR unless someone thinks of a reason it's critical
13:56 < pinheadmz> but its just a feeling, doesnt feel right
13:56 < nehan_> I'm confused about the conversation her: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17428/files#diff-9a82240fe7dfe86564178691cc57f2f1R1824
13:56 < luke-jr> (but maybe it's simpler than I assume)
13:57 < nehan_> *here
13:57 < nehan_> what is that code doing?
13:57 < instagibbs> was there a special reason that anchor connections were blocksonly ones?
13:57 < luke-jr> instagibbs: privacy
13:58 < luke-jr> scroll up
13:58 < instagibbs> there's lots of scroll
13:58 < instagibbs> lol
13:58 < amiti> pinheadmz: "use it against"? I think theres ways an eclipse attacker can take over the anchors, but it requires more work. do you think there's further exploits they could do with the anchors?
13:58 < instagibbs> luke-jr, that seems to be a point against "reduce anchors with addnode"
13:58 < pinheadmz> amiti: no just that, taking over the anchors
13:58 < nothingmuch> instagibbs: ~18:22
13:58 < luke-jr> instagibbs: no, you have the downside there with addnode whether or not you have auto-anchors
13:58 < instagibbs> GMT? (doing head math)
13:59 < nothingmuch> instagibbs: yep, heh, i was thinking of doing *:22 just to avoid that confusion
13:59 < amiti> pinheadmz: ah yes, I think thats possible, esp with this first implementation that is intentionally scoped to be minimal
13:59 < nothingmuch> instagibbs: 25 mins ago ;-)
13:59 < instagibbs> luke-jr, I don't understand what you're saying.
14:00 < hebasto> nehan_: that code about connection priority
14:00 < amiti> nehan_: that code is checking if there are valid anchors and if so trying to connect to them before continuing with the other connection logic
14:00 < amiti> ok! looks like thats time!
14:00 < amiti> thank you all for coming and participating
14:00 < pinheadmz> great job amiti
14:00 < amiti> and thank you hebasto for this PR :)
14:00 < jnewbery> great meeting amiti. That was a lot of fun. Thanks!
14:00 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
14:01 < emzy> Thank you amiti and all!
14:01 < lightlike> thanks!
14:01 < _andrewtoth_> thanks all!
14:01 < pbleam> thanks!
14:01 < instagibbs> luke-jr, oh are you saying you've already done the damage(privacy) while also gained the connection robustness?
14:02 < luke-jr> yes
14:02 < instagibbs> ah, ok
14:02 < nehan_> thanks!
14:02 < instagibbs> hmm, maybe :) I'll think on it
14:02 < luke-jr> anchors don't *require* privacy; it's just something we don't want to lose with them
14:02 < luke-jr> addnode loses privacy, but it also provides what anchors accomplish
14:03 < embark> thanks amiti and all good meeting
14:03 < instagibbs> luke-jr, if you weren't punked into connecting to someone evil manually(manual vs auto I know you discussed that)
14:03 < lightlike> tough PR, lots of decisions to make with pros and cons that seem really hard to weight against each other.
14:03 < instagibbs> good stuff
14:03 < luke-jr> instagibbs: we can't stop users from shooting themsleves in the foot all the time
14:04 < instagibbs> worst-case for now it's 2 additional anchor connections which I don't think in practice will matte
14:04 < instagibbs> obviously more blocks only connections would change this
14:11 < nothingmuch> fwiw it appears addnode is capped at 8 independently of other outbound conns
{% endirc %}
