---
layout: pr
date: 2020-06-17
title: "Add BIP324 encrypted p2p transport de-/serializer (only used in tests)"
pr: 18242
authors: [jonasschnelli]
components: ["p2p"]
host: ariard
status: past
commit: 7aa91cd1
---

**Note:** in this PR Review club we will review the first three commits only
(`Expose MAC length in chacha_poly_ahead_h`, `Add BIP324 short-IDs to
protocol.h/.cpp` and `Add BIP324 v2 transport serializer and deserializer`).

## Notes

- Today's PR is part of the implementation of [BIP324: Version 2 Peer-to-Peer
  Message Transport
  Protocol](https://gist.github.com/jonasschnelli/c530ea8421b8d0e80c51486325587c52),
  proposed by Jonas Schnelli to improve privacy on the p2p network.

- Currently, P2P messages are transported in plaintext, which
  makes them vulnerable to eavesdropping by infrastructure entities such as
  ISPs. Such entities can tamper with, drop, or delay messages between anonymous
  peers. A malicious infrastructure entity could use this to influence the
  network topology, determine the origin of transactions, or perform attacks
  against off-chain protocols.

- BIP 324 is the second proposal for an encryption standard for the Bitcoin P2P
  network. The previous proposal ([BIP
  151](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0151.mediawiki)) was
  also authored by Jonas Schnelli and has been withdrawn.

- In BIP 324, messages are encrypted by the stream cipher
  [ChaCha20](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7539) with a Poly1305 [Message
  Authentication
  Code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Message_authentication_code).

- A BIP 324 session starts with an [Elliptic Curve Diffie Hellman key
  exchange](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic-curve_Diffie%E2%80%93Hellman)
  to establish a shared session key between peers (this key exchange is not yet
  implemented). From this shared sesssion secret, 2 keys, `K_1` and `K_2` are
  derived. `K_1` is used to encrypt the 3 bytes packet length. `K_2` is used to
  encrypt and authenticate the rest of the packet. Using symmetric keys `K_1` and
  `K_2`, the receiver first decrypts the length number and from this offset
  authenticates the packet. If authentication succeeds, the receiver decrypts the
  message payload and hands the content to the processing layer.

- Other PRs that are part of BIP 324 implementation:
  - [#15206: Immediately disconnect on invalid net message checksum](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15206) (discussed in a [previous Bitcoin Core PR Review Club](/15206))
  - [#15519: Add Poly1305 implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15519)
  - [#15649: Add ChaCha20Poly1305@Bitcoin AEAD](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15649)
  - [#16202: Refactor network message deserialization](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16202)
  - [#16562: Refactor message transport packaging](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16562)

- [Jonas Schnelli's talk](https://github.com/kanzure/diyhpluswiki/blob/master/transcripts/breaking-bitcoin/2019/p2p-encryption.mdwn)
  at Breaking Bitcoin 2019 has additional information on BIP 324.

- A further step to prevent eavesdropping on the P2P network would be to add
  peer authentication, which is outside the scope of BIP 324. How to
  authenticate peers in an anonymous network is an [area of active
  research](https://gist.github.com/sipa/d7dcaae0419f10e5be0270fada84c20b).

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
   (Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. What's your process to review a PR implementing a new BIP? Did you read the
   BIP or the code first? How can you ensure that BIP is correct? How can you ensure
   that code implements the BIP correctly?

3. BIP 324 introduces a new message structure, notably with short command ID.
   What do you think about those new short command ID?

4. Why was the Chacha20/Poly1305 construction chosen? Have you read Bitcoin
   Core implementations of these primitives?

5. Beyond code review, how can testing be improved? What failure cases should
   be tested?

6. Could the serialization/deserialization code be better documented or
   simplified? Consider the choices of data structures and algorithms.

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
13:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
13:00 < jnewbery> hi
13:00 < SirRichard> hi
13:00 < andrewtoth> hi
13:00 < willcl_ark> hi
13:01 < thomasb06> hi
13:01 < lightlike> hi
13:01 < ariard> hi
13:01 < raj_149> hi
13:01 < emzy> hi
13:01 < jnewbery> today's notes and questions are here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/18242.html
13:01 < troygiorshev> hi
13:01 < jnewbery> ariard is our host. Over to you, ariard!
13:01 < ariard> thanks jnewbery!
13:02 < ariard> so to get started, usual question who has reviewed the PR ?
13:02 < raj_149> y
13:02 < willcl_ark> y
13:02 < SirRichard> y
13:02 < ariard> that's great! have you left any comment on it ?
13:02 < raj_149> y
13:02 < willcl_ark> no :(
13:03 < emzy> n
13:03 < nehan> hi
13:03 < SirRichard> n
13:03 < nehan> y
13:03 < jnewbery> n
13:04 < ariard> okay what was your process to review a PR implementing a BIP ?
13:04 < ariard> did you read the BIP or code first ? or dig into context around the BIP, like reading old mail threads ?
13:05 < willcl_ark> The context to me seems pretty rational from the BIP
13:05 < raj_149> 1. read the bip. 2. read on missing gaps that i dont understand yet 3. read the code. 4. tally the code with the BIP.
13:05 < willcl_ark> (i read the BIP first)
13:05 < ariard> raj_149: quick reply, it's hard to be sure you have enough pointer without a second implementation not hurting wrinkles
13:06 < ariard> willcl_ark: what seems you rational here ? what this BIP is trying to achieve?
13:06 < emzy> I read the BIP first.
13:06 < ariard> raj_149: what were the missings gaps?
13:07 < willcl_ark> ariard: we want to prevent kinds of MITM attacks which are easy on unencrypted traffic.
13:07 < raj_149> ariard: depends on individual's previous knowledge. for me i didn't knew chacha20, poly1305 and AEAD details. so had to read them up first.
13:09 < raj_149> willcl_ark: it seems this doesn't necessarily solves all forms MITM, i guess the draft also mentions this somewhere. if i am not mistaken.
13:09 < ariard> willcl_ark: in Bitcoin context, why it makes sense to encrypt traffic ? Most of data is already public like blocks, headers
13:10 < ariard> raj_149: yes generally you have to, it's pretty lengthy reviewing this kind of PR when it involves cryptographic primitives
13:10 < ariard> have you been through the process to assert this pick up of cryptographic primitives compare to alternative ?
13:10 < jnewbery> (anyone can feel free to answer any of these questions)
13:11 < pinheadmz> encrypted traffic obscures the fact that you even have abitcoin node running
13:11 < raj_149> ariard: for start it stops traffic analysis and IP to publickey linkage. In general all sorts of privacy leaks that can occur by monitoring network traffic of a node.
13:11 < pinheadmz> and withou, people can snoop on the network connectivity graph, TX propogation and maybe resolve the origin of a ne TX
13:12 < ariard> pinheadmz: obscures to whom? not if you're running on port 8333
13:12 < pinheadmz> who says I am? :-)
13:12 < pinheadmz> I dunno, oppressive regimes
13:12 < willcl_ark> if you can tamper with messages, you can get legitimate (truthful) peers banned
13:12 < ariard> no I mean your ISP can still learn you're running bitcoin if you're using port 8333
13:13 < pinheadmz> ariard I understand but you dont have to use port 8333 and if my ISP sees a bunch of encrypted blobs coming into port 9000, that is at least plausible denyability
13:13 < jnewbery> and even if you're not using port 8333, bitcoin p2p traffic has an unmistakable pattern
13:13 < ariard> pinheadmz: with tx propogation for sure it obfuscates tx origin for on-path attacs, now spy peers can still observe origin by connecting to you
13:14 < pinheadmz> certainly for SPV or Neutrino, there is privacy leaked with plaintext mesages
13:14 < pinheadmz> but that privacy is leaked to the full node you connect to anyway
13:14 < ariard> raj_149: which publickey you're pointing to ? what kind of privacy leaks you can think of beyond tx origin ?
13:15 < pinheadmz> Im not sure if theres an attack vector around this, but you mightbe abe to tell where a node is in the sync process by reading their traffic
13:15 < ariard> jnewbery: that's a huge concern, even tx propagation may still leak being interactive and we don't do padding
13:16 < emzy> it's not only good to secure the p2p trafic from your ISP eyes, it's also good agains state level surveillance.
13:16 < pinheadmz> ariard do you know - i asked this on the BIP draft - why not use Noise Protocol for the key exchange the way Lightning does?
13:16 < ariard> pinheadmz: if you assume attacker knows about 1) block announcement 2) listen for transactions flooding 3) can map encrypted blob size to transactions received?
13:17 < raj_149> ariard: i am not exactly sure on the kind of possible leaks that can happen over clear text data. I read somewhere by monitoring network traffic and some kind of triangulation observer can link origin transactions with IP addresses, without connecting to me as a node. Would like to know about other possible leaks that i dont know about. clearly there should be some over encrypted data.
13:17 < jnewbery> pinheadmz: you surely can tell if a node is in IBD, even if you used a stream cipher to encrypt the messages
13:17 < populate> regarding the entropy of encrypted information with strong time entropy: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traffic_analysis
13:18 < ariard> pinheadmz: I'm not sure but I would say historical reasons, Noise Protocol wasn't fully spec out when BIP 151 was first submitted
13:18 < emzy> also in flight modification of the data is easy posible without MAC
13:19 < sipa> pinheadmz, ariard: there is some interaction with development of a private authentication protocol we've been working on
13:19 < sipa> noise's authentication relies on revealing identities, which is something we want to avoid
13:19 < willcl_ark> if you wanted to eclipse someone, tampering with their current peers' messages (and having them disconnected) seems like a good start
13:19 < willcl_ark> maybe this PR doesn't quite solve that though
13:19 < ariard> raj_149: see https://arxiv.org/pdf/1812.00942.pdf on in-protocol leaks
13:20 < ariard> emzy: but what about a MitM attacker intercepting communications from both side? there is no authentication with BIP324
13:21 < sipa> the full functionality obviously needs encryption + authentication
13:21 < willcl_ark> ONe thing I noticed it this BIP (and lightning) vs "standard" ChaCha20 Poly1305 is that we encrypt the packet length, why is this?
13:21 < sipa> but authentication is very easy to add in a modular way once we have encryption
13:21 < jnewbery> willcl_ark: if you can tamper with traffic you can get a peer disconnected, but not banned. The terminology is a bit confusing currently, but the disconnected peer is allowed to reconnect
13:21 < willcl_ark> jnewbery: ok, thanks for the clarification
13:22 < emzy> ariard: Right, but it's only posible at first connection attempt. A running session is save from MitM attack. So it is better then not.
13:22 < jnewbery> of course, if you're able to tamper with messages, you could just continue to do that to get them disconnected again, or just block all traffic
13:22 < willcl_ark> even a "ban" is always temporary (some length of time) also I think, right?
13:22 < raj_149> ariard: thanks.
13:22 < ariard> sipa: but we could have reuse a Noise pattern with ephemeral key pairs? It doesn't mandate how you exchange key pairs?
13:22 < jnewbery> willcl_ark: 24 hours by default
13:22 < willcl_ark> yes
13:22 < sipa> ariard: right, that could work, using noise purely with ephemeral keys
13:23 < ariard> willcl_ark: good question, to make dumb traffic analysis harder?, see real_and_random and my posts on the BIP
13:23 < pinheadmz> would it make sense to have static keys for "precious" nodes ?
13:23 < sipa> though i expect even in that case we'd want our own "vendored" version, with secp256k1 keys etc
13:23 < pinheadmz> for example, connecting my personal SPV to my remote Full Node
13:23 < sipa> pinheadmz: yes, that's called authentication!
13:23 < sipa> pinheadmz: and of course that's the eventual goal
13:23 < willcl_ark> ariard: Oh i didn't see the comments at the end of the BIP!
13:23 < pinheadmz> i thought you meant authentication like message integirty
13:24 < sipa> pinheadmz: ah, no
13:24 < sipa> pinheadmz: history is that we original had BIP150/BIP151 for auth and enc
13:24 < sipa> BIP151 was replaced with BIP324
13:24 < pinheadmz> eevntual goal, so nodes would have <pubkey>@IP:port kind of hostnmaes like lightning ?
13:24 < ariard> jnewbery: I was verifying just before is this really what we do in AcceptConnection
13:24 < ariard> pinheadmz: please not permanent pubkeys like in LN
13:25 < sipa> pinheadmz: perhaps that's getting off-topic, but the idea is that there wouldn't be any *observable* identities (for obvious reasons)
13:25 < sipa> but if you *know* the identity of a peer you're connecting to, you can private determine whether it's them
13:25 < pinheadmz> excellent
13:25 < sipa> (without them even knowing that authentication succeeds)
13:25 < sipa> https://gist.github.com/sipa/d7dcaae0419f10e5be0270fada84c20b (a bit outdated, but the writeup is mostly right still)
13:26 < ariard> emzy: right, but in practice if you assume ISP-capabilities like attackers they would be in place for intercepting at any moment of the session
13:27 < willcl_ark> ariard: so am I right after reading the comments in thinking we only encrypt the packet length, but still don't MAC it (not re-read the code changes)?
13:27 < sipa> willcl_ark: that's right
13:27 < ariard> sipa: right does Noise make it mandatory to use Curve25519?
13:27 < sipa> ariard: i honestly don't know
13:27 < emzy> ariard: If you have a long running node, the time window is very narrow.
13:28 < ariard> willcl_ark: yes we don't MAC it, BOLT8 does it, I spent few hours yesterday trying to find even theoritical attacks on modifying a length field MAC
13:29 < sipa> ariard: secp256k1 isn't supported by the noise framework, but it'd be possible to of course use a noise protocol that we instantiate ourselves
13:29 < willcl_ark> slightly off topic, but I appreciated the short command ID improvement here
13:29 < sipa> though at that point i think the advantages are rather small
13:29 < ariard> and found nothing, so likely too minor
13:29 < sipa> at a high conceptual level, bip324 is effectively that
13:29 < willcl_ark> ariard: sipa, thanks
13:30 < raj_149> sipa: can you through some pointer on what do you mean by noise framework?
13:30 < raj_149> *throw
13:30 < sipa> raj_149: https://noiseprotocol.org/
13:30 < raj_149> thanks..
13:30 < ariard> used by whatsapp or lightning among others
13:32 < raj_149> feels like kinda same thing BIP324 is doing?
13:32 < ariard> sipa: yes I slightly agree, does anyone have done at least of properties comparison between a Noise pattern with ephemeral keys vs BIP324 ?
13:32 < sipa> raj_149: bip324 is encryption only, no auth
13:33 < sipa> (it's authenticated encryption, but that's detecting tampering, not identity of the peer)
13:33 < ariard> emzy: I'm not sure the time window matters here, internet infrastructure is quite static
13:33 < ariard> okay let's move to next question
13:33 < raj_149> sipa: got it. ariard: no but seems interesting exercise.
13:34 < ariard> BIP324 introduces a new message structure, notably with short command ID, what do you think about it ?
13:34 < raj_149> loved it. :D
13:34 < ariard> especially the new short command ID? is it worth the complexity vs bandwidth saving argued ?
13:34 < ariard> raj_149: haha please explain
13:34 < raj_149> thougb currently it seems hardcode. Not p2p agrrement. is that correct?
13:35 < ariard> raj_149: yes no p2p agreement for now
13:35 < ariard> which makes sense bip324 is already big enough, it can be done in future specifications
13:35 < willcl_ark> I saw some discussion over Cap'n'proto (for the GUI), was there a concious choice not to also leverage that here?
13:35 < troygiorshev> At this level it seems just fine to have the compact IDs
13:35 < willcl_ark> (but very happy to see bandwidth reductions!)
13:35 < raj_149> ariard: well if we only have a finite set of command lists, it makes sense to map them into numbers instead of transmiting them as chars.
13:36 < sipa> willcl_ark: i don't see how those are related at all
13:36 < sipa> the P2P protocol is not an RPC protocol (it's message based, not function call based), and capnproto doesn't do encryption
13:36 < willcl_ark> well the short IDs are basically a protocol spec?
13:36 < willcl_ark> hmmm ok, seemed like defining a protocol for messages to me
13:37 < sipa> you could probably route capnproto over the encrypted stream bip324 defines
13:37 < sipa> but they're fundamentally a very different layer
13:37 < willcl_ark> as in, analagous to how Protobufs encode messages according to a .proto file
13:37 < willcl_ark> sipa: OK
13:37 < sipa> willcl_ark: it's like asking why not use HTTP instead of SSL
13:38 < ariard> raj_149: can you envision what nodes would negotiate a different set of mappings?
13:38 < ariard> *why
13:39 < raj_149> ariard: honestly i couldn't come up with any reason. maybe for some they just need a subset of those so dont wanna assign all the numbers? not sure if its worth the effort though.
13:39 < willcl_ark> sipa: it just seemed to me that e.g. Protobuf kind of does what that massive `if else` statment does, but with a well-defined proto file
13:40 < willcl_ark> but will research it more :)
13:40 < sipa> willcl_ark: bitcoin already has a p2p protocol, we're not proposing to replace it with something else entirely
13:40 < ariard> raj_149: well we may have experimentation with new P2P messages, like LN custom messages, I can see people trying to communicate through P2P to their wallets
13:40 < sipa> (or at least, no reason to do that simultaneously with introducing encryption)
13:41 < ariard> especially if we add authentication
13:41 < willcl_ark> sipa: yes I gues you can't just do it for a single part (command)
13:41 < willcl_ark> anyway I'm very much in favour of some bandwidth reductions on this front!
13:41 < ariard> next question: why ChaCha20/Poly1305 were chosen ? have you read implementation
13:41 < lightlike> it could lead to confusion when there are several bips that introduce new p2p messages (that need new numbers). e.g. BIP 157 messages that are merged are not assigned a number yet.
13:42 < sipa> lightlike: a new bip can introduce short numbers for newly introduced messages
13:42 < raj_149> ariard: yes they can use negotiations to add extra *special* messages between them. But these messages still needs to be defined in the protocol right? So they can as well be assigned with short_id there?
13:42 < sipa> so that there doesn't need to be coordination
13:42 < troygiorshev> lightlike: agreed.  Might not be too hard to say "just give this the next available number" though
13:42 < willcl_ark> ariard: faster than AES on most CPUs
13:44 < willcl_ark> I think it's better for chips without AES-NI, right?
13:44 < ariard> raj_149: if they are negotiated and protocol is custom, your bandwidth savings priorities may not be equivalent to the default ones
13:45 < ariard> willcl_ark: right for software implementations
13:45 < raj_149> ariard: I am not seeing how bandwidth saving is different in a negotiated short_id than a hardcoded one.
13:46 < raj_149> ariard: on poly1305, why are we using goto in the code? isn't there any better way to do it? for example the donna implementation doesn't seem use it.
13:46 < luke-jr> hi
13:48 < ariard> raj_149: let's say I have my own range of custom messages which make 80% of my traffic, there is no room left in the default short command ID table, by negotiating I can overrules with my own maps and thus save traffic?
13:48 < willcl_ark> ariard: is there another reason that better (faster) performance on average across different CPUs?
13:48 < willcl_ark> than*
13:49 < sipa> raj_149: i assume it's based on the openssh code
13:49 < sipa> https://github.com/openssh/openssh-portable/blob/master/poly1305.c
13:49 < sipa> (i haven't checked)
13:49 < raj_149> ariard: why there wont be any room left in default table if the protocol itself defines the short_ids while defining the command?
13:49 < ariard> willcl_ark: yes it's design have been vetted as more conservative than AES and less prone to cryptographic breakage
13:49 < ariard> *its
13:50 < sipa> ariard: chacha more conservative than aes?
13:50 < ariard> see cryptanalysis table at the end of Salsa20 paper, though I've not compare to ones on AES
13:50 < sipa> i wouldn't say that
13:50 < sipa> it's just faster and more modern, and well-studied
13:50 < sipa> (aes being a block cipher has inherent complexity, which is unnecessary for stream encryption)
13:51 < ariard> sipa: it's claimed by Bernstein in the ChaCha paper, "Salsa20/20 is amore conservative design than AES, and the community seems to have rapidlygained confidence in the security of the cipher."
13:51 < ariard> which should be taken with carefulness
13:51 < sipa> ariard: such claims by the author should be taken with a grain of salt, i think :)
13:51 < sipa> but i guess i see what he means
13:52 < ariard> I completly agree and why I said I've not read cryptanalysis AES to compare
13:52 < sipa> but i wouldn't claim that chacha is more well-analyzed than AES
13:52 < willcl_ark> perhaps, "good enough" (and faster)?
13:53 < troygiorshev> modern and well-analyzed (if not-quite-as-well-analyzed) seems notable
13:53 < willcl_ark> was the alternative AES + CBC? becuase it would seem prefereable over that
13:53 < sipa> AES-GCM would be the typical alternative
13:54 < willcl_ark> ah ok
13:54 < sipa> or AES-CTR-GCM more precisely
13:54 < sipa> AES-CTR is a stream cipher like ChaCha20; GCM is a MAC like Poly1305
13:54 < ariard> raj_149: which protocol are you talking about ? If I experiment with my custom one, it won't be supported by the default implementation
13:55 < willcl_ark> sipe: thanks. I have much cryptography to learn!
13:55 < ariard> next question: how testing can be improved ? what failure cases should be tested?
13:55 < jnewbery> 5 minutes left!
13:55 < raj_149> ariard: ah i see that now.
13:57 < troygiorshev> it's great that fuzzing is already in
13:57 < troygiorshev> a parallel implementation in python could be nice
13:57 < raj_149> ariard: we definitely need functional tests once its fully getched. So far it only implements en/decryption, which seems to be adequately tested in unit test.
13:58 < raj_149> *fetched
13:58 < ariard> troygiorshev: have you looked on fuzz scope ? what kind of cases could be missed by fuzzer?
13:58 < ariard> \
13:58 < willcl_ark> I couldn't get the fuzz tests to work on MacOS 10.15 :(
13:59 < troygiorshev> ariard: not deeply enough, no.  definitely worth doing!
13:59 < willcl_ark> I couldn't see any tests for the re-keying process, but maybe missed them!
13:59 < ariard> last question: could the serialization/deserialization code be better documented or simplified ? have you look on data struct and algorithm choice ?
14:00 < raj_149> i have taken up an issue which will force me to look deeper into fuzzing. Planning to fuzz this once i get there.
14:00 < ariard> willcl_ark: I think the re-keying is still WIP, or at least we need to think about some of its implications
14:00 < willcl_ark> ariard: ah ok
14:01 < jnewbery> that's time!
14:01 < willcl_ark> thanks ariard very interesting discussion
14:01 < jnewbery> Next week's meeting is on 18468, hosted by sipa. Notes will be posted soon: https://bitcoincore.reviews/18468.html.
14:01 < raj_149> thanks ariard, nice review session.
14:01 < thomasb0`> thanks ariard
14:01 < troygiorshev> thanks ariard!
14:01 < jnewbery> See you all there!
14:01 < ariard> great, I invite anyone who hasn't review yet the PR to do it with questions in mind :)
14:01 < emzy> thanks ariard!
14:01 < ariard> yw
14:01 < populate> thanks ariard
14:02 < SirRichard> Thanks ariard great discussion
14:02 < andrewtoth> thanks ariard! very interesting discussion
14:02 < furunodo> thanks!
14:03 < thomasb0`> sipa: what I was thinking about was to pick a random and compute either Euclide, theStack's pow, or the exponential ladder. What do you think?
14:03 < sipa> ... why?
14:03 < thomasb0`> to use several algorithms
14:03 < sipa> why wouldn't you always use the fastest
14:04 < thomasb0`> to track down bugs
14:04 < sipa> the tests already do both
14:04 < thomasb0`> then, no need for change
14:07 < furunodo> what's a good place to start for getting into the python test code, beyond bitcoin/test/functional/README.md?  say if I wanted to start (or work on) a parallel test implemtation in python?
14:08 < furunodo> (as suggested by troygiorshev)
14:08 < thomasb0`> sipa: btw I was talking about python, only...
14:10 < thomasb0`> furunodo: it looks like you need to be confident to make relevant modifications by yourself
14:10 < sipa> furunodo: that would be the place to start
14:11 < sipa> all the functional python tests are in test/functional (with lots of utilities in test/functional/test_framework)
{% endirc %}
