---
layout: pr
date: 2020-11-04
title: "Remove dead CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork"
pr: 19905
authors: [MarcoFalke]
components: ["consensus"]
host: MarcoFalke
status: past
commit: fa7eed5b
---

## Notes

- Following an accidental chain split in 2013 (documented in [BIP
  50](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/7e3284da/bip-0050.mediawiki)), a
  fork warning system was added in [PR
  2658](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/2658).

- The feature was originally tested via the large reorg test (today found
  in `test/functional/feature_block.py`). However it is no longer possible to
  trigger the warning due to changes in the validation logic.

- The validation logic to validate and potentially connect a new block is
  handled in `ProcessNewBlock()`, which can be called from `ProcessMessage()`
  in `src/net_processing.cpp` or from the `submitblock` RPC. `ProcessNewBlock()` runs basic
  validation sanity checks and stores the block to disk. If the initial checks
  pass, it calls `ActivateBestChain()` to (try to) connect the block to the
  best chain.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PRs? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)

2. What are some examples of when a chain split can happen? Which ones should
   users be warned about?

3. `ActivateBestChain()` consists of two nested loops. What is the condition for
   each loop to terminate?

4. The inner loop calls `ActivateBestChainStep()`, which disconnects blocks (in
   case of a reorg) and connects a batch of up to 32 blocks toward the new tip.
   When an invalid block is found, `CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork()` is
   called. Which block from the batch is passed to
   `CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork()`?

5. `ActivateBestChainStep()` will also call `m_chain.SetTip()`, which updates the
   global reference to the active chain tip (`::ChainActive().Tip()`). What is
   the maximum block height difference between `pindexNewForkTip` and `pfork`?

6. Is it possible to hit the condition that updates `pindexBestForkTip`?

7. What are your thoughts on the approach of the pull request? Should the bug
   in the warning system be fixed or should the code be removed? What
   alternative places/ways to implement the warning logic can you think of?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
17:00 < jnewbery> hi folks. Welcome to review club!
17:00 < emzy> hi
17:00 < stacie> hi
17:00 < sift> hi
17:00 < murch> hi
17:00 < andozw> hi
17:00 < jnewbery> feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
17:00 < fjahr> hi
17:00 < lightlike> hi
17:00 < glozow> hi
17:00 < carlakc> hi
17:00 < dongcarl> hi
17:00 < michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 < jnewbery> anyone here for the first time?
17:01 < andozw> :waves: :)
17:01 < troygiorshev> hi
17:01 < fi3> hi
17:01 < jnewbery> welcome andozw! Thanks for joining us :)
17:01 < MarcoFalke> hi
17:01 < andozw> thank you! excited to learn
17:01 < nehan> hi
17:01 < jnewbery> Notes and questions are in the normal place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/19905
17:02 < MarcoFalke> Reminder don't ask to ask, just ask :)
17:02 < jnewbery> MarcoFalke wrote the notes and questions and is hosting today, so I'll pass over to him. Thanks Marco!
17:02 < sergei-t> hi
17:02 < MarcoFalke> ok, let's get started. Who reviewed the pull?
17:02 < jonatack> hi
17:02 < jnewbery> y
17:02 < stacie> y
17:02 < sergei-t> jnewbery: I'm for the first time. Totally unprepared, will probably just lurk.
17:02 < nehan> y
17:03 < troygiorshev> n (only a little)
17:03 < MarcoFalke> sergei-t: Welcome
17:03 < dongcarl> y
17:03 < fi3> n
17:03 < lightlike> 0.5
17:03 < jnewbery> sergei-t: that's fine. Lurkers are welcome too!
17:03 < carlakc> I went through it, but still getting a handle on cpp so very high level
17:03 < carlakc> will likely also lurk :)
17:04 < fjahr> wip
17:04 < felixweis> hi
17:04 < emzy> n
17:04 < MarcoFalke> Today we are talking about chain splits. What are some examples of when a chain split can happen? Which ones should users be warned about?
17:04 < felixweis> 2013 types of chain splits
17:05 < michaelfolkson> Name all 2013 please
17:05 < nehan> if the network is partitioned
17:05 < emzy> There was the problem with 32 and 64 bit systems. Remember not more about it.
17:06 < sipa> emzy: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2015-July/009697.html
17:06 < MarcoFalke> Which ones should the user *not* be warned about?
17:06 < stacie> BIP-50 describes a chain split as an unintended result of switching from Berkely DB to Level DB. Level DB was able to handle blocks with more tx inputs
17:06 < nehan> or if there's a soft fork
17:06 < michaelfolkson> I guess there are bugs causing network chain splits. Natural re-orgs would be considered temporary chain splits?
17:06 < lightlike> one harmless example would just two blocks found at almost the same time by chance.
17:06 < nehan> a user probably shouldn't be notified if it's very small, or if they're still doing IBD
17:06 < fjahr> Competing blocks mined by different miners competing for the longest chain.
17:06 < felixweis> few blog reorgs. 1 stale block happens regularly
17:07 < pinheadmz> chainsplits are worrisome after a soft fork like strict DER - miners were not fully validating!
17:07 < MarcoFalke> Good points so far
17:07 < sift> pinheadmz +1
17:08 < MarcoFalke> About expected stale blocks, users shouldn't be warned, but if there is a disagreement about consensus rules, they should be warned.
17:08 < MarcoFalke> Let's got to the next question.
17:08 < MarcoFalke> ActivateBestChain() consists of two nested loops. What is the condition for each loop to terminate?
17:08 < sift> consensus-equivalent, block-production equivalent chain split would be worrying
17:09 < nehan> i think outer loop: caught up to tip of most-work chain we've seen
17:10 < MarcoFalke> btw, this is the function for those lurking: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ed9f5477502e5856eba742656e8fc0fcf7bb053b/src/validation.cpp#L2870
17:10 < stacie> I noticed CBlockIndexWorkComparator returns true if the block passed in as the second parameter is the “better” block (based on the following criteria, in order: if it has more work, was received earlier (nSequenceId), or has a lower pointer address). My question is, is that how comparators typically work in C++? Return true if the second parameter is “better”?
17:10 < MarcoFalke> nehan: right
17:11 < lightlike> inner loop: our current tip (after connecting some blocks) has more work than the one we started this loop with
17:11 < MarcoFalke> lightlike: correct
17:12 < sipa> stacie: comparators' contract is to return true for "less than"
17:12 < sipa> e.g. std::set<int> is the same as std::set<int, std::less<int>>
17:13 < MarcoFalke> The inner loop calls ActivateBestChainStep(), which disconnects blocks (in case of a reorg) and connects a batch of up to 32 blocks toward the new tip. When an invalid block is found, CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork() is called. Which block from the batch is passed to CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork()?
17:13 < sipa> where std::less<int> is an object that exposes an operator()(int a, int b) { return a < b; }
17:13 < jnewbery> Compare function: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/Compare
17:14 < stacie> ahh! thanks sipa & jnewbery!
17:14 < MarcoFalke> again for lurkers: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ed9f5477502e5856eba742656e8fc0fcf7bb053b/src/validation.cpp#L2744
17:16 < stacie> the first invalid block from the batch (the one with the lowest height) is the one passed to CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork()
17:17 < MarcoFalke> stacie: correct
17:17 < MarcoFalke> ActivateBestChainStep() will also call m_chain.SetTip(), which updates the global reference to the active chain tip (::ChainActive().Tip()). What is the maximum block height difference between pindexNewForkTip and pfork?
17:18 < MarcoFalke> (This question is a bit more tricky, so I won't accept an answer that is just a single number ;)
17:19 < MarcoFalke> for lurkers, we just jumped into a new function: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ed9f5477502e5856eba742656e8fc0fcf7bb053b/src/validation.cpp#L1378
17:20 < MarcoFalke> reminder that pindexNewForkTip is "the first invalid block from the batch (the one with the lowest height)" (correct answer from stacie)
17:21 < michaelfolkson> A tip within 72 blocks but a fork that is at least 7 blocks. What does that mean?
17:22 < jnewbery> MarcoFalke: are you asking for the difference in height between pindexNewForkTip and plonger?
17:22 < jnewbery> (pfork is set to pindexNewForkTip)
17:22 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: pfork, when it has been assigned it's final value
17:23 < MarcoFalke> pfork is initialized to pindexNewForkTip, and then "walked back" to determine the base of the fork
17:24 < fjahr> Should be just 1 because if its only the first block in the fork that is passed to the function
17:24 < murch> That comment is odd. Was that second sentence inserted into the middle of the big sentence?
17:24 < jnewbery> I think pindexNewForkTip is either on the active chain, or it's the child of a block on the active chain
17:25 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: The code is more clear on that. It means the fork tip is within 72 blocks of our current tip, but the fork is at least 7 blocks "heavy" (with pow)
17:26 < MarcoFalke> fjahr: Correct
17:26 < murch> Given that different difficulties can only appear across diff adjustments, and the adjustment is limited to a factor of four, why a factor of 10?
17:26 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: Also correct. If it is on the active chain, the difference is 0. If not, it is 1
17:27 < MarcoFalke> murch: Are you asking about the "10%"?
17:27 < jnewbery> just to clarify a point above. The block that's passed to CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork() isn't necessarily an invalid block
17:27 < sift> MarcoFalke "but the fork is at least 7 blocks "heavy" (with pow)" 7 blocks worth of PoW weight...relative to what?
17:28 < MarcoFalke> sift: Measured relative to the pow of the fork base block
17:28 < stacie_> For the earlier question about the inner loop in ActivateBestChain(). terminating, I see the line where the conditions are defined, https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ed9f5477502e5856eba742656e8fc0fcf7bb053b/src/validation.cpp#L2932 but I can't find where starting_tip is updated. I'm guessing it might have something to do with the fact that it's a pointer? (my cpp is rusty :) )
17:28 < sift> MarcoFalke e.g. 7 blocks worth of PoW weight at the divergence point?
17:28 < jnewbery> imagine we've tried to connect 32 blocks in a loop in ActivateBestChainStep() and the 10th block is invalid. The pindex that we pass to CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork() will be the first block in that batch of 32, which is a valid block
17:28 < MarcoFalke> sift: yes, that's how I see it
17:29 < sift> ty
17:29 < sipa> stacie_: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ed9f5477502e5856eba742656e8fc0fcf7bb053b/src/validation.cpp#L2898
17:29  * sift thinks about a miner, under producing blocks to drop that 7 block pow weight and then turning on hash rate
17:30 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: thanks for the extended explanation :)
17:30 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: To round up, can you also explain why the diff wouln't be negative in case the passed block is valid?
17:31 < stacie_> sipa - thanks. so every time the loop progresses, the m_chain.Tip() call will result in a new value, right?
17:31 < murch> 7 blocks worth of weight, but 72 blocks long seems impossible, because diff could only change minusculy between two competing tips
17:31 < MarcoFalke> murch: not "72 blocks long", but "withing 72 blocks of our tip"
17:31 < sipa> stacie_: starting_tip doesn't change
17:31 < murch> But I think I haven't really grokked what the 72 and 7 blocks are
17:32 < jnewbery> MarcoFalke: because plonger will walk back until it's the same block as pindexNewForkTip
17:32 < sipa> but m_chain.Tip will
17:32 < murch> oh, you mean it could include a stale tip forking off 30 blocks ago?
17:32 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: Correct, thx.
17:32 < troygiorshev> stacie_: if I'm seeing it right, it's line 2547 that makes the change to m_chain.Tip
17:32 < MarcoFalke> murch: Yes, that was the design goal (I think)
17:33 < lightlike> stacie_: I think that starting_tip is not updated once defined (it is the reference we compare to), but m_chain.Tip() ist updated inside of ConnectTip(), which is called from ActivateBestChainStep
17:33 < troygiorshev> stacie_: i take it back, it's what lightlike said :)
17:34 < michaelfolkson> murch: I am unsure why you need a warning about a stale tip forking off 30 blocks ago. Who cares?
17:34 < murch> Well, would still indicate a consensus failure
17:35 < murch> someone got forked off and recognized an ancestor of your chaintip as invalid
17:35 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: For example if 40% of miners are building on a different chain, that is 30 blocks back
17:35 < michaelfolkson> Oh ok, that makes sense
17:37 < MarcoFalke> Is it possible to hit the condition that updates pindexBestForkTip?
17:37 < stacie_> catching up now - thank you sipa, trygiorshev and lightlike! That explains it. I didn't dive into the methods that ActivateBestChainStep calls but it makes sense now!
17:37 < stacie_> *troygiorshev
17:38 < elle> MarcoFalke: pIndexNewForkTip never gets set because it is only set if pfork is set...which is only set if pIndexNewForkTip is set
17:40 < elle> oh sorry , looking at wrong variable
17:40 < MarcoFalke> To recap: pfork is set, but the height difference between pindexNewForkTip and pfork is at most 1
17:41 < jnewbery> We need to look at this condition: pindexNewForkTip->nChainWork - pfork->nChainWork > (GetBlockProof(*pfork) * 7)
17:42 < MarcoFalke> Jup, we are in CheckForkWarningConditionsOnNewFork, which is supposed to update the pindexBest* variables
17:43 < glozow> is pfork the base of the fork there? sorry very basic question
17:43 < MarcoFalke> glozow: Correct
17:43 < MarcoFalke> pfork is the assumed base of the fork relative to our current chain tip
17:43 < glozow> so the condition jnewbery is talking about = there's 7 blocks worth of work on the fork?
17:44 < glozow> 7 blocks of work on 1 block? 🤔
17:44 < MarcoFalke> glozow: Yes. This is one of the conditions that need to be fulfilled to update the pindexBest* variables
17:45 < michaelfolkson> 7 blocks of work on 7 blocks
17:45 < fjahr> michaelfolkson: but the condition would only be fulfilled if you would have 7 blocks of work in 1 block
17:46 < jnewbery> so we've established that pindexNewForkTip and pfork can be at most one block apart, and the condition is that there's at least 7 block's worth of difference in their total work. Is that possible?
17:46 < fjahr> that's the thing why it can't be hit or only in theory
17:46 < glozow> seems like the answer to Marco's question is ~no
17:47 < MarcoFalke> Correct, this can not be hit
17:47 < MarcoFalke> Extra question: if the we passed the highest block of the to-be-connected chain instead, what would the height difference between pfork and pindexNewForkTip be?
17:48 < jnewbery> the to-be-connected chain is 32 blocks
17:48 < fjahr> 32
17:48 < jnewbery> *up to 32 blocks, sorry
17:48 < MarcoFalke> up to 32 or always 32?
17:48 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: Heh, nice
17:49 < MarcoFalke> That the lowest hight block is passed is an oversight/bug, but can the fork detection logic be fixed by passing the highest block?
17:49 < murch> jnewbery: no, because two competing blocks can only differ in difficulty in forks across a difficulty adjustment and a factor 7 won't be possible there
17:50 < MarcoFalke> murch: Even with a difficulty adjustment this should not be possible
17:50 < sift> 10 minutes left
17:50 < murch> yes
17:50 < MarcoFalke> I think those are limited to a factor of 4
17:50 < murch> Well, one could go down, the other up
17:51 < murch> but the time difference wouldn't be that big in practice
17:51 < MarcoFalke> What are your thoughts on the approach of the pull request? Should the bug in the warning system be fixed or should the code be removed? What alternative places/ways to implement the warning logic can you think of?
17:52 < michaelfolkson> I have a couple of unrelated questions. What tools are available to the user to react to the warning? Presumably if they became aware of a UASF like scenario they could join it
17:52 < michaelfolkson> And then where is the warning test in test/functional/feature_block.py? I couldn't find it with a quick search
17:53 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: Good q. If I was an exchange and I'd see a warning, I'd shut down all nodes for now
17:53 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: It is the "re-org" test (last test which creates more than 1000 blocks)
17:53 < jnewbery> MarcoFalke: I think that removing dead code and adding working code can be seen as two separate questions. I don't think "You should fix it" is a reasonable response to someone removing broken code.
17:54 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: I tend to agree
17:54 < jnewbery> if it's broken and has been for many releases, then removing the dead code so the code reflects reality is a quality improvement in itself
17:54 < jnewbery> if someone then wants to implement a working warning system, that should be judged on its own merits
17:54 < troygiorshev> Might this be a similar situation to the old "alert notify" system?  Where (even if it was fixed) it's simply outdated?
17:54 < sift> seems like priority should be soundness first, performance second
17:55 < michaelfolkson> In response to your questions MarcoFalke you say in the PR comment "add a fork detection somewhere outside of the ActivateBestChainStep logic (maybe net_processing)."
17:55 < murch> Anything that is an obvious improvement has merit, and removing dead code is an obvious improvement
17:55 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: Yes, I think that the internal validation logic is the wrong place to put the fork detection algorithm
17:56 < michaelfolkson> I don't think anything has changed re whether the warning is needed or not. If it was needed back then it is needed today too
17:56 < murch> Upping the bar just leads to abandoned PRs and frustrated would be contributors
17:57 < fjahr> It doesn't seem like the ideal way to solve this so removing and (possibly) reimplementing seems better than fixing which would make the PR more complicated. But I don't have great ideas how it should be done.
17:57 < michaelfolkson> But yeah if it doesn't work and it is in the wrong place it should be removed
17:57 < michaelfolkson> Ideally there would be a follow up PR reimplementing it :)
17:57 < MarcoFalke> A warning system is very much needed
17:58 < jnewbery> michaelfolkson: you're very welcome to open that PR!
17:58 < emzy> Could be first an external one.
17:58 < michaelfolkson> Haha
17:58 < emzy> To figure out what's the best parameters.
17:58 < fjahr> michaelfolkson: just change the 7 to 1 and reuse the rest of the code :P
17:59 < sift> The_scream.jpg
17:59 < MarcoFalke> Any last minute questions/suggestions?
18:00 < MarcoFalke> #endmeeting
18:00 < MarcoFalke> Thanks everyone!
18:00 < troygiorshev> thanks MarcoFalke!
18:00 < sift> thanks MarcoFalke !
18:00 < murch> Thanks
18:00 < emzy> Thank you MarcoFalke!
18:00 < stacie_> Thank you MarcoFalke!
18:00 < jnewbery> I tend to think that if it wasn't working, then ripping it out and starting from scratch is safer. It shouldn't be the case, but tweaking code that wasn't working would probably receive less scrutiny in review than implementing something new
18:00 < felixweis> Thanks MarcoFalke!
18:00 < sergei-t> thanks!
18:00 < lightlike> thanks!
18:00 < carlakc> thanks for the lurker links marco!
18:00 < fjahr> thanks MarcoFalke
18:00 < jnewbery> Thanks MarcoFalke!
18:01 < dongcarl> thanks MarcoFalke!
18:01 < michaelfolkson> Thanks MarcoFalke, very interesting
18:01 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: If the fix was trivial, I might have fixed it. But I don't even see a way to fix this without rewriting the validation core
18:01 < MarcoFalke> logic
18:02 < michaelfolkson> I guess in terms of review the most important thing is to check that the code being ripped out isn't used elsewhere. Just for the warning
18:02 < jnewbery> Well done everyone. Today was a difficult PR to review. We went really deep into the consensus code. If you managed to follow along for the whole meeting you can give yourself a pat on the back :)
18:02 < jnewbery> we'll do something a bit easier next week
18:04 < fjahr> BTW, that the code discussed is not hit by any of the tests can also be seen in the coverage analysis: https://marcofalke.github.io/btc_cov/total.coverage/src/validation.cpp.gcov.html obviously also provided by MarcoFalke
18:04 < MarcoFalke> fjahr: lol, I initially spent a day trying to write a test for it
18:05 < MarcoFalke> writing tests for uncovered code is a good way to find dead and buggy code
18:05 < michaelfolkson> What are you using to identify code that can be safely be ripped out? Just eyes and something like ctags?
18:05 < fjahr> :)
18:05 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: writing tests. I haven't used ctags yet
18:06 < MarcoFalke> I only use vanilla git and vim (and firefox for GitHub)
18:06 < michaelfolkson> OK cool, thanks
{% endirc %}
