---
layout: pr
date: 2020-08-12
title: "Implement BIP 340-342 validation - Support for Schnorr Signatures and integration in SignatureCheckers"
pr: 17977
authors: [sipa]
components: ["consensus", "taproot"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: ff9b7e6
---

This is the fourth in [a series of review club
meetings](./meetings-components/#taproot) on the (work in progress)
implementation of BIP 340-342. 

This week, we'll look at another commit from PR 17977 - _[Support for Schnorr
signatures and integration in
SignatureCheckers](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/125318b68a)_.

## Notes

- This is the first commit from PR 17977 that uses the new functionality and interfaces
  in libsecp256k1. You may need to `make clean && ./configure && make` for the build to
  succeed.

- [_Schnorr signatures_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schnorr_signature) are a
  digital signature scheme that can be constructed over any group where the
  discrete log problem is hard. It's a different signature scheme from ECDSA,
  which is used in Bitcoin today, but there are certain similarities between the
  two schemes.

- We won't go into the construction of Schnorr signatures or the motivation for
  adding them to Bitcoin, but it'd be useful to have a high-level understanding of
  those things to motivate why we're making these changes. [BIP
  340](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki) explains
  both the motivation and the construction of these signatures.

- We also won't go into the implementation of signing and verifying the
  signatures themselves. That's all hidden away inside the libsecp library. The
  [first](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/94dc6bcc)
  [two](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/59354a78)
  commits from PR 17977 pull in the required changes to libsecp. If you want to
  dig deeper into the implementation, [lipsecp PR
  558](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/secp256k1/pull/558) is where the new
  cryptographic code is implemented.

- Instead, we're going to look at the new interface provided by libsecp for
  verifying Schnorr signatures, and how it's integrated into Bitcoin Core.

- The first thing to note about the Schnorr signature interface is that
  [pubkeys in
  BIP340](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/125318b6#diff-10ed0089ccea825883e83e5afcef7697R209)
  are 32 bytes. That's unlike pubkeys in our ECDSA implementation,
  which are 33 or 65 bytes (depending on whether they're _compressed_ or
  _uncompressed_). BIP 340 public keys can be 32 bytes because the y-value
  or the point is implicit. See the **Implicit Y coordinates** and **Public Key
  Generation** sections of [BIP
  340](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0340.mediawiki) for full
  details.

- The new `XOnlyPubKey` object is the lowest-level object we'll use for signature
  validation. It's constructed with a uint256, and then the function
  `VerifySchnorr()` is called with the 32 bytes hash of the message that was
  signed (this hash can sometimes just be called the 'message', or in the case of
  signing a Bitcoin transaction the 'sighash'), and the 64 byte signature.

- The `XOnlyPubKey` object is used within a hierarchy of signature checker classes,
  which are used by the higher-level code to check signatures:

  - At the base is
    [`BaseSignatureChecker`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/interpreter.h#L171),
    which provides three (virtual) public methods: `CheckSig()`,
    `CheckLockTime()` and `CheckSequence()`. This PR adds `CheckSchnorrSig()`.

  - Above that is
    [`GenericTransactionSignatureChecker`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/interpreter.h#L198)
    (which is actually a template that's instantiated as
    `TransactionSignatureChecker` or `MutableTransactionSignatureChecker` depending
    on whether it's being used with a `CTransaction` or `CMutableTransaction`).
    `GenericTransactionSignatureChecker` overrides the virtual `CheckSig()` and
    `CheckSchnorrSig()` methods with implementations of signature verification.

  - And above `TransactionSignatureChecker` is a
    [`CachingTransactionSignatureChecker`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/sigcache.h#L43),
    which uses the signature cache (calling
    `CachingTransactionSignatureChecker::Verify____Signature()` more than once on
    the same transaction won't result in the same signatures being validated
    multiple times).

- The main functional changes in this PR are in
  [`GenericTransactionSignatureChecker::CheckSigSchnorr()`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1550-L1569)
  and [the `CSignatureHash`
  constructor](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/sigcache.cpp#L33-L46).

## Questions

1. Why does BIP 340 use 32 byte public keys? How do we get away with not including
   the y-coordinate in the public key?

2. What other derived classes use the `BaseSignatureChecker` as their base class?

2. What is [this
   code](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1558-L1564)
   doing? When do we expect a signature to be 64 bytes, and when is it 65 bytes?

3. Why do we have a signature cache? How does it help performance?

4. Why is [this
   change](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/125318b68a#diff-8a3cc5f1d2678a348e95e4884d1827f1R38-R45)
   necessary?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <jnewbery> #startmeeting
19:00 <jnewbery> hi folks!
19:00 <emzy> Hi
19:00 <willcl_ark> hi
19:00 <troygiorshev> hi
19:00 <pinheadmz_> Hi! On mobile. This'll be weird
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:01 <fjahr> hi
19:01 <jnewbery> welcome to Bitcoin Core PR Review Club
19:01 <jnewbery> This week we're talking about .....
19:01 <jnewbery> ... TAPROOT
19:01 <jnewbery> (again)
19:01 <fjahr> Taprrrrrrrrrroot
19:01 <troygiorshev> woot!
19:01 ⚡ graveyard party hat
19:01 <evanlinjin> Hello everyone!
19:01 <jnewbery> notes and questions are where you'd expect them: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17977-2
19:01 <evanlinjin> This is my first time :)
19:01 <graveyard> hi evanlinjin
19:01 <nehan> hi
19:01 <willcl_ark> hi evanlinjin
19:02 <jnewbery> hi evanlinjin. Welcome. We love new participants :)
19:02 <evanlinjin> Hello, thank you for the welcome!
19:02 <jnewbery> who had a chance to review this week's commit?
19:02 <jonatack> taproooooooo oooo ooooot (hi)
19:02 <jnewbery> y/n (no worries if you didn't have time)
19:02 <sipa> hi
19:02 <evanlinjin> Sorry, not me
19:02 <pinheadmz_> Y
19:02 <troygiorshev> n
19:02 <michaelfolkson> y
19:02 <sipa> i've looked at it once or twice
19:02 <fjahr> y
19:02 <emzy> n
19:02 <michaelfolkson> Have you reviewed this week's commit sipa?
19:02 <fjahr> sipa: probably when you wrote it :D
19:03 <jnewbery> sipa: that's good to know
19:03 <jonatack> i've looked at it less than sipa has
19:03 <jnewbery> ok, lots of notes this week. Not so many questions, but that means there's more time for _your_ questions
19:03 <jnewbery> q1: Why does BIP 340 use 32 byte public keys? How do we get away with not including the y-coordinate in the public key?
19:04 <michaelfolkson> BIP 340 laid out three options and plumped for the third
19:04 <pinheadmz_> Every x has 2 y. We just require the y to be odd (or square) or negative. Or whichever it ended up being. ;/)
19:04 <fjahr> The "Implicit Y coordinates" section in BIP340 explains it: Every X coordinate has 2 two Y coordinates. There are different options on how to determine which Y to use but the Y which is a quadratic residue was chosen.
19:04 <graveyard> since it's mirrored we can set the zone we want to look at and it's inferred
19:04 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson pinheadmz_ fjahr graveyard: exactly correct!
19:05 <pinheadmz_> And pubkey Y isn't the same as R value Y right?
19:05 <pinheadmz_> It's quad reissue for one and positive ness for the other ?
19:05 <nehan> n
19:05 <pinheadmz_> *quadratic residue
19:06 <jnewbery> a public key in elliptic curve cryptography is a point, but because the curve is mirrored in the x-axis, as long as we all agree a scheme to determine which of the 2 possible y values to choose, then we don't actually need to explicitly state which y value we're using
19:06 <fjahr> pinheadmz_: i think they both use quad residue but had different explainations why
19:07 <nehan> deterministic symmetry breaking to choose the y
19:07 <sipa> i guess this is as good a time to mention this as any: i believe our original reasoning for picking quadratic residue for R was flawed, and we should consider making both use even
19:07 <sipa> i'm about to send a mail to list about that, today
19:07 ⚡ michaelfolkson looking up the original reasoning
19:07 <pinheadmz_> sipa interesting. I thought there were performance reasons why R should be one or the other
19:08 <emzy> lol
19:08 <sipa> the reasoning was "it's faster for single verification" - turns out it isn't, and in fact it's probably slower in practice
19:08 <fjahr> I'm wrong. P uses even.
19:08 <jnewbery> sipa: so the final final final version of BIP 340 will have both using implicit even y?
19:08 <sipa> jnewbery: well, we could decide not to change things at this point anymore
19:08 <graveyard> should be an interesting read
19:08 <pinheadmz_> jnewbery: using the "F" word
19:08 <sipa> but i owe an explanation, since our justification was based on incorrect assumptions
19:09 <jnewbery> pinheadmz_: i didn't say "final final final final"
19:09 <pinheadmz_> Ha
19:09 <felixweis> now i learned what a quadratic residue is for no reason :(
19:09 <felixweis> jk
19:09 <michaelfolkson> How does one conclude it is faster and then realize it isn't? Yeah looking forward to the read too
19:09 <jnewbery> ok, next question: What other derived classes use the BaseSignatureChecker as their base class?
19:09 <nehan> michaelfolkson: +1
19:10 <jnewbery> (apart from GenericTransactionSignatureChecker)
19:10 <sipa> michaelfolkson: i'm happy to elaborate, but i think probably not during this meeting
19:10 <michaelfolkson> Yeah no problem, thanks
19:10 <fjahr> I found DummySignatureChecker and SignatureExtractorChecker
19:10 <willcl_ark> SignatureExtractorChecker
19:11 <jnewbery> sipa: thanks. Let's focus on Bitcoin Core's use of the signature verification in this meeting, and maybe circle back to the cryptography at the end if we have time
19:11 <sipa> jnewbery: sgtm
19:12 <jnewbery> fjahr willcl_ark: yep. Did you look into what those are doing?
19:12 <graveyard> evalscript?
19:13 <jnewbery> I also found one other class that inherits from BaseSignatureChecker
19:13 <fjahr> Dummy is a what is it's name says and just accept all signatures
19:13 <michaelfolkson> TransactionSignatureChecker, MutableTransacstionSignatureChecker, CacheTransactionSignatureChecker too.... were they derived from Base? (just checking)
19:14 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: yes, see this week's notes from "The XOnlyPubKey object is used within a hierarchy of signature checker classes..."
19:15 <jnewbery> The other derived class I found is called FuzzedSignatureChecker
19:15 <jnewbery> (used in fuzz testing)
19:16 <thomasb06> what number is 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFEFFFFFC2F ?
19:16 <pinheadmz_> thomasb06: is that the curve order?
19:16 <jnewbery> ok, we have this hierarchy of classes for signature checking. Let's look into how it's actually doing that verification.
19:17 <thomasb06> pinheadmz_: yes
19:17 <jnewbery> what does this code do: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/125318b6/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1558-L1564 ?
19:17 <pinheadmz_> Checks the sighash
19:17 <thomasb06> pinheadmz_: han... Thanks
19:17 <michaelfolkson> Checks if the signature is 64 bytes or not
19:18 <felixweis> if its 65 bytes but still SIGHASH?DEFAULT its illegal bc its implicit
19:18 <fjahr> 65 bytes includes a different sighash type (not SIGHASH_DEFAULT) in the last byte. It gets stripped and the 64 bytes are used to check sig. If its 64 bytes the default is used automatically. 65 bytes with SIGHASH_DEFAULT is not allowed to protect against malleability.
19:18 <gzhao408> u can't have a 65B sig if it's hashtype == SIGHASH_DEFAULT?
19:18 <michaelfolkson> And then if it isn't checks that it isn't SIGHASH_DEFAULT as that is only defined for Taproot
19:18 <felixweis> to mitigate malleability
19:19 <pinheadmz_> gzhao408: you can
19:19 <pinheadmz_> gzhao408: but if you leave off sighash byte it it implicitly sighash all
19:19 <gzhao408> o
19:19 <pinheadmz_> You can optionally have 0x01 as well for explicit ALL
19:19 <pinheadmz_> I think
19:20 <sipa> indeed
19:20 <pinheadmz_> Or perhaps for backwards compatibility ? sipa?
19:20 <pinheadmz_> Why allow both options
19:20 <willcl_ark> we covered this in a previous meeting but I don't quite recall now
19:20 <sipa> some things may rely on a predictable signature size, and account for 65 byte anyway
19:21 <jnewbery> willcl_ark: indeed, we talked about this a couple of weeks ago
19:21 <jnewbery> https://bitcoincore.reviews/17977#l-86
19:22 <willcl_ark> <sipa> pinheadmz: you can do either; have a 64-byte one with implicit sighash 0, or explicitly make a 65-byte sig with hashtype 1; their semantics are the same... but the signature will still differ because the hash commits to the actual hashtype value
19:22 <pinheadmz_> Lol is that from the last meeting?
19:22 <jnewbery> if there's no sighash byte (and the sig is therefore 64 bytes), then the sighash is SIGHASH_DEFAULT, which hashes the same transaction data as SIGHASH_ALL
19:22 <michaelfolkson> 2 weeks ago
19:23 <pinheadmz_> But the question of design... sounds like for interop or backwards compat
19:23 <jnewbery> so gzhao408 is right to say you can't have a 65B if it's hashtype == SIGHASH_DEFAULT
19:24 <jnewbery> you can have SIGHASH_ALL, which is the same transaction data (but the hash also includes the sighash to avoid malleability between SIGHASH_DEFAULT and SIGHASH_ALL)
19:24 <thomasb06> p = 2^256 - 2^32 - 2^9 - 2^8 - 2^7 - 2^6 - 2^4 - 1 = 115792089237316195423570985008687907853269984665640564039457584007908834671663
19:24 <jnewbery> If any of this is confusing or unclear, then I recommend rereading the notes and logs from two weeks ago
19:25 <jnewbery> Next question: Why do we have a signature cache? How does it help performance?
19:26 <fjahr> tx sigs can be evaluated multiple times by a node for example at entry of mempool and when included in a block. with the cache it doesn't have to which si saving computation resources.
19:26 <pinheadmz_> I had a few Qs a about this
19:26 <gzhao408> bc signature verification takes SOOOO LONG and u usually have to do it at least twice, atmp and in block
19:26 <michaelfolkson> Performance optimization and DoS protection
19:26 <pinheadmz_> Ok yeah I thought mempool/Block. But also don't understand the purpose of the salt
19:27 <gzhao408> le salt is DoS protection
19:27 <sipa> more defense in depth
19:28 <sipa> if there somehow is a collision in the cache's hashing, it would be on an isolated machine, rather than consistently on every node in the network
19:29 <willcl_ark> that's pretty smart!
19:29 <sipa> note that there is also a full validation cache in validation.cpp
19:30 <sipa> since the introduction of that, the sigcache's role is primarily dos resistance
19:31 <jnewbery> where 'full validation cache' means caching the result of validating a single script with specified flags
19:31 <sipa> exactly
19:31 <jnewbery> I wrote a bit about that a few years ago if you want to read a bit more: https://johnnewbery.com/post/whats-new-in-bitcoin-core-v0.15-pt5/
19:31 <sipa> rather than individual signature validations
19:32 <michaelfolkson> Apparently you had a discussion on this in 2012 with Jeff Garzik sipa ;) https://bitslog.com/2013/01/23/fixed-bitcoin-vulnerability-explanation-why-the-signature-cache-is-a-dos-protection/
19:33 <jnewbery> the script cache is here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/bd00d3b1f2036893419d1e8c514a8af2c4e4b1fb/src/validation.cpp#L1472
19:33 <jnewbery> pinheadmz_: did you have any other questions about signature cache?
19:33 <michaelfolkson> That jnewbery blog post is very good, I remember that
19:33 <pinheadmz__> Jsut about why salt and not key by the entire sig
19:34 <sipa> pinheadmz__: it is
19:34 <sipa> Entries are SHA256(nonce || signature hash || public key || signature)
19:34 <pinheadmz__> And that won't be collision resistant without nonce?
19:34 <sipa> sure it would be
19:34 <sipa> there is no technical reason why the nonce is needed
19:34 <sipa> but it also comes at 0 cost
19:35 <pinheadmz__> Ah
19:35 <sipa> (the midstate of "SHA256(nonce ||" is precomputed)
19:35 <pinheadmz__> Ok that is a cool design feature
19:36 <gzhao408> jnewbery: when you check against the script cache, do you go by exact verify flags or any superset is fine?
19:36 <jnewbery> gotta love them midstate precomputations
19:37 <jnewbery> gzhao408: I think it's by the exact verify flags, but I'm not 100% sure
19:38 <jnewbery> yes, the exact flags: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/13c4635a3ecfbc6759301fb3c94bd5293c49388c/src/validation.cpp#L1518-L1525
19:38 <jnewbery> ok, final question. Why is the change here necessary: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/125318b68a#diff-8a3cc5f1d2678a348e95e4884d1827f1R38-R45
19:40 <fjahr> We want nonce of ecdsa and schnorr to be different, to prevent collisions as well I assume? This also has zero cost I guess...
19:42 <sipa> exactly
19:42 <jnewbery> fjahr: exactly, we don't want ecdsa and schnorr signatures in the cache to collide (slight correction: s/nonce/key)
19:43 <sipa> there *should* be no need for that either, as the sighashes should never collide
19:43 <jnewbery> ok, those were the only questions I had prepared for this. What did you all think of that commit? Pretty easy to follow? Any questions?
19:44 <michaelfolkson> Sorry I don't quite get this last part. A 64 byte signature collision?
19:45 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: take a look at the signature cache. The structure is a cuckoocache, which has a key and a value
19:46 <michaelfolkson> Ok
19:46 <jnewbery> the key we use is a hash of various things, and we don't want those keys to collide
19:46 <sipa> it's really a set
19:47 <jnewbery> sipa: right, thanks
19:47 <michaelfolkson> Any questions evanlinjin? You still there?
19:47 <evanlinjin> I'm still here!
19:48 <evanlinjin> No questions so far. Learning a lot
19:48 <evanlinjin> I should probably look into the PR beforehand for next time though
19:48 <michaelfolkson> Otherwise can we ask about sipa about the u turn?
19:49 <gzhao408> i have question about script cache, not related to this though
19:49 <jnewbery> sure, if sipa's around and wants to talk about quadratic residues
19:49 <jnewbery> gzhao408: go ahead!
19:50 <sipa> actually let me just share the mail i'm planning to send: https://0bin.net/paste/TYkaOevuGeiiMdhv#7qExtowsogSYGHGUOSFQ+gVA5Nl9Ss78lpNx-LQPyBc
19:50 <sipa> if anyone feels like reading and pointing things out that aren't clear or so, go ahead
19:51 <michaelfolkson> evanlinjin: Cool feel free to reach out or post on this channel during the week if you have general questions
19:52 <evanlinjin> michaelfolkson: Thank you!
19:53 <thomasb06> for real numbers, the equivalent of quadratic residue is "is the number positive, or negative". If the number is positive, it has a square root. If it's negative, it hasn't. In F_p, half numbers are square roots and half are not. The Legendre symbole says if it does or not.
19:53 <felixweis> how does ed25519 get away with 32 bytes pubkeys?
19:53 <gzhao408> jnewbery: well, the reason i asked if the script cache uses exact verify flags is according to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e16718a8b3db8bf9c9715f28f4dc6080bf609776/src/script/interpreter.h#L31 they are meant to be soft forks, i.e. if a script passes for a set of flags A, then it would definitely pass for any subset of A right? hopefully i don't have that backwards. and usually if we were to verify
19:53 <gzhao408>  script in atmp, we use more flags (e.g. standardness) than when we are validating a block. but what i mean to say is... i feel like it doesn't need to be the exact verify flags?
19:53 <michaelfolkson> "The benchmark was repeatedly testing the same constant input, which apparently was around 2.5x faster than the average speed. It is a variable-time algorithm, so a good variation of inputs matters."
19:54 <jnewbery> sipa: lots to digest there. My very rudimentary understanding was that to lift an x co-ordinate onto a point, the last step was squaring, so you'd always end with a quadratic residue. Is that relevant here?
19:54 <sipa> jnewbery: that's correct, but not relevant i think
19:54 <sipa> it matters for batch validation where the R.x coordinate is lifted explicitly to a point
19:55 <sipa> but batch validation is not impacted by this (as it needs a sqrt anyway)
19:55 <sipa> invididual validation does not need a sqrt, it recomputes R, and then verifies it against the signature
19:55 <jnewbery> sipa: ok, I'll go away and read the post. Thanks for writing it up!
19:55 <michaelfolkson> For what it is worth I don't think an improvement like this shouldn't be made because it is late in the day. It doesn't have knock on impacts right?
19:56 <sipa> i need to run now, but i'll read messages later here if anyone has comments
19:57 <jnewbery> gzhao408: the flags used for validating are hashed into the cache entry, so it'd be quite a big redesign to make the change you're suggesting
19:58 <jnewbery> if you're interested in this subject, take a look at where we call CheckInputScripts() multiple times in ATMP to explicitly fill the cache
19:58 <jnewbery> I also need to run now. Thanks everyone. Great discussion today!
19:59 <thomasb06> thanks
19:59 <fjahr> jnewbery: Thanks for hosting!
19:59 <troygiorshev> yeah thanks jnewbery!
19:59 <michaelfolkson> Thanks jnewbery
20:00 <evanlinjin> Thank you jnewbery!
{% endirc %}
