---
layout: pr
date: 2020-09-05
title: "Implement BIP 340-342 validation - Implement Taproot validation (BIP 341)"
pr: 17977
authors: [sipa]
components: ["consensus"]
host: jnewbery
status: upcoming
commit: 84ec87085
---

This is the fifth Review Club meeting on the (work in progress) implementation
of BIP 340-342.  We've previously looked at:

- [O(1) OP_IF/NOTIF/ELSE/ENDIF script implementation / Abstract out script
  execution out of VerifyWitnessProgram()](./16902)
- [Initialize PrecomputedTransactionData in CheckInputScripts and Move
  single-sig checking EvalScript code to EvalChecksig](./18401)
- [Implement Taproot signature hashing](./17977)
- [Support for Schnorr Signatures and integration in SignatureCheckers](./17977-2)

This week, we'll look at another commit from PR 17977 - _[Implement Taproot
validation (BIP
341)](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080c)_.

## Notes

- Remember that this PR uses an updated version of libsecp256k1 that requires
  the `--enable-module-schnorrsig` and `--enable-experimental` options. You may
  need to `make clean && ./configure && make` for the build to succeed.

- This commit implements the [_script validation
  rules_](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0341.mediawiki#script-validation-rules)
  from BIP 341. It'll help to refer back to that specification as you review the
  code.

- There are several [script verification
  flags](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4631dc5c/src/script/interpreter.h#L29-L117)
  defined in the software. These are passed to the script interpreter and specify
  which rules the interpreter should enforce. Each of these verification flags
  should be a tightening of the rules (adding a new script verification flag can
  make a previously succeeding script fail, but cannot make a previously failing
  script succeed).

- This commit adds two new script verification flags: `SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT`
  and `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION`. 

- _Pay-to-contract_ is a method of hiding a commitment inside a public key,
  which can be selectively revealed later. The idea has been around for many
  years, with the [original taproot
  post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-January/015614.html)
  citing [a paper by Ilja Gerhardt and Timo
  Hanke](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1212.3257.pdf) from 2012. Taproot uses pay-to-contract
  to commit to a script (or scripts) inside a public key.

- This commit adds a
  [CheckPayToContract()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-10ed0089ccea825883e83e5afcef7697R223)
  function, which calls through to the `secp256k1_xonly_pubkey_tweak_add_check()`
  function.

- The main code changes in this commit are in `src/script/interpreter.cpp`. The
  [VerifyWitnessProgram()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1697)
  is modified, and a new
  [VerifyTaprootCommitment()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1677)
  is added.

- Everything in the [if (stack.size == 1)
  branch](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1734-R1739)
  corresponds to the "If there is exactly one element left in the witness stack,
  key path spending is used" section of the BIP. Everything in the [else
  branch](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1740-R1755)
  corresponds to the "If there are at least two witness elements left, script
  path spending is used" part of the BIP.

- This commit does not add any script verification for the taproot script path
  spending (that comes in a later commit). Once the taproot commitment has been
  verified, we either fail validation if the
  `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION` is set, or succeed if it
  isn't
  ([code](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a6ca5080#diff-be2905e2f5218ecdbe4e55637dac75f3R1751-R1754)).

## Questions

1. Will the new `SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT` and
   `SCRIPT_VERIFY_DISCOURAGE_UPGRADABLE_TAPROOT_VERSION` script verification
   flags be used for consensus checks or policy checks?

2. What is the maximum permitted size of the control block?

3. What happens if a segwit v1 output has a witness program that isn't 32
   bytes? What happens if there's a P2SH-wrapped segwit v1 output?

4. Explain this line: `if (!(flags & SCRIPT_VERIFY_TAPROOT)) return set_success(serror);`

5. What error is given if `VerifyTaprootCommitment()` fails? Why?

## Meeting Log

<!-- TODO: After meeting, add log
{% irc %}
{% endirc %}
-->
