---
layout: pr
date: 2020-09-30
title: "Calculate fees in getblock using BlockUndo data"
pr: 18772
authors: [robot-visions]
components: ["rpc/rest/zmq"]
host: robot-dreams
status: past
commit: 1298f0fca7
---

## Notes

* A transaction's fee is not set explicitly. The fee can be implicitly
  calculated from the difference between total input value and the total output
  value.

* This PR updates the `getblock` RPC to include an extra "fee" field for transactions whenever:

    - `verbosity >= 2`
    - Undo data (which can be used for efficient fee calculation) exists for that block

* We discussed block undo data and how it's stored on disk in [a previous review club meeting](/17994).

* Some extra changes were added to prevent fuzz test failures; we discussed
  fuzz testing and how it's used in Bitcoin Core in [a previous review club
  meeting](/17860).

## Questions

1. What is `CTxUndo`?

    - How are we using it for fee calculation?
    - Where else is it used?
    - Why doesn't a coinbase transaction have Undo data?

2. What's the IO cost to read Undo data for a block?

3. How could we calculate the fee if Undo data didn't exist for a block, and
   what's the IO cost?

    - If there's a txindex?
    - If there's no txindex?

4. What does `CHECK_NONFATAL` do?

    - What other options are there (e.g. asserts), and when should we use each
      option?

5. Knowing the transaction fee is useful, but does only returning it in some
   circumstances actually provide a better client experience, or is it
   preferable for clients to always get exactly what they expect?

    - Should we also calculate the fee if Undo data is missing but a `txindex`
      is available?

6. At the moment, the fact that we might return "fee" is undocumented. Is it
   worth increasing the complexity of the documentation to say "we SOMETIMES
   return the fee; here's when we do so"?

7. We add some extra checks to prevent integer overflow in fuzz tests. But does
   it make sense for fuzz tests to generate inputs that violate function
   preconditions?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 < robot-dreams> #startmeeting
17:00 < emzy> hi
17:00 < elle> hi :)
17:00 < robot-dreams> Hi everyone, welcome!
17:00 < amiti> hi!
17:00 < stacie> hi! first timer here
17:00 < gloriazhao> hi!
17:00 < jrawsthorne> Hi
17:00 < lightlike> hi
17:00 < dhruvm> hi!
17:00 < robot-dreams> Welcome Stacie!
17:00 < gloriazhao> ooo hello stacie so excited to see you here!!!!
17:01 < stacie> Thanks everyone! :)
17:01 < robot-dreams> Friendly reminder that all questions are welcome! Feel free to jump in at any point
17:01 < felixweis> hi
17:01 < troygiorshev> hi!
17:01 < robot-dreams> Anyone else here for the first time?
17:01 < elle> yeah, my first time :)
17:01 < robot-dreams> Welcome Elle :)
17:01 < jrawsthorne> Second time, first time not being late
17:01 < nehan> hi
17:02 < robot-dreams> Congrats jrawsthorne and great to have you back!
17:02 < robot-dreams> And last quick poll before we get into the questions, who's had a chance to review the PR? y/n
17:02 < sunon> y
17:02 < elle> y
17:02 < troygiorshev> y
17:02 < felixweis> y
17:02 < stacie> y
17:02 < jrawsthorne> y
17:02 <@jnewbery> y
17:03 < epson121> y
17:03 < nehan> yish
17:03 < amiti> n! I've taken a look but haven't properly reviewed
17:03 < emzy> y
17:03 < dhruvm> 0.5
17:04 < robot-dreams> Awesome!! Hopefully it was a relatively short / readable change, but I think there are some interesting underlying ideas.
17:04 < robot-dreams> All good Amiti, thanks for taking a look!
17:04 < robot-dreams> All right, let's jump in.
17:04 < robot-dreams> First off, what is `CTxUndo`?
17:05 < sipa> hi
17:05 < jrawsthorne> utxos spent by a transaction
17:05 < sunon> Class containing undo information for a CTransaction and its txins
17:05 < dhruvm> It's a convenience data structure used to unlink a block during IBD
17:06 < jonatack> hi
17:06 < robot-dreams> Excellent! I would agree with all of that
17:06 < robot-dreams> How are using `CTxUndo` for fee calculation in the PR?
17:06 < felixweis> its a representation of the rev* data in your blocks/ directory. it allows to restore  an UTXO in the set if we need to "rewind" the blockchain because a longer branch was found. remember, all spends from the shorter block chain removed the info (amount, bitcoin script)
17:08 < dhruvm> If CTxUndo is available at the call site for TxToUniv, we pass it in and use it to compute sum(outputs)-sum(inputs)
17:08 < felixweis> CTxUndo got introduced with UltraPrune invented by sipa and shipped in Bitcoin-Qt 0.8
17:08 < robot-dreams> dhruvm exactly! And question to anyone, which part of this computation involves the undo data?
17:09 < elle> the sum of the value of the inputs
17:09 < robot-dreams> elle: yes, exactly
17:09 < Paul_R> hi, excuse my tardiness.
17:09 < robot-dreams> felixweis thanks for the extra context!
17:09 < Paul_R> is there anyway I can read the backlog of this session?
17:10 < robot-dreams> hi Paul_R, welcome!
17:10 < Paul_R> thx robot-dreams
17:10 < robot-dreams> It'll be posted on the website after the session, so you'll be able to see the full log
17:10 < Paul_R> ok
17:10 < robot-dreams> felixweis: btw thanks for writing the commit that added this!
17:11 < felixweis> thanks *you* for picking it back up!
17:11 < robot-dreams> Quick question to make sure we're all on the same page, why doesn't a coinbase transaction have Undo data?
17:12 < sunon> There are no txins right?
17:12 < dhruvm> Because there's no UTXO
17:12 < sipa> no effective txins
17:12 < elle> It doesnt have an input that needs to be undone
17:12 < robot-dreams> sunon dhruvm sipa elle exactly! sounds like we're all on the same page here
17:12 < sipa> there is a CTxIn in a coinbase, but it's not actually spending any preexisting UTXO
17:12 < sunon> Ah yeah so not a relevant txin
17:13 < robot-dreams> An interesting follow-up question (outside the scope of this session) is: what are all the uses of the coinbase CTxIn?
17:13 < robot-dreams> And finally, where else is CTxUndo used? dhruvm already mentioned unlinking a block during IBD; is there anything else?
17:14 < sunon> Extra nonce space?
17:14 < sipa> and BIP34
17:15 < sunon> I found it being used in UpdateCoins() in validation but have no idea why to be honest.
17:15 < sipa> that's just where it's constructed
17:16 < jrawsthorne> For the filter index
17:16 < sunon> ah I see
17:17 < robot-dreams> sunon: Yup, I agree there's not a lot of context in UpdateCoins itself, but I found looking at where UpdateCoins itself got called to be helpful
17:17 < felixweis> BIP34 encodes the block height in the coinbase scriptSig field. so coinbase txids are still unique. previously they sometimes did override old coins.
17:18 < jrawsthorne> For previous question, although not related to consensus pools use it to mark their blocks
17:19 < robot-dreams> jrawsthorne Nice, that seems like another interesting use of the undo data! Something else we can follow up on if we have time later, "what exactly is the filter index and how does that work"
17:19 < robot-dreams> But let's proceed for now.
17:19 < robot-dreams> This might be my favorite question for today's session:
17:19 < robot-dreams> What's the IO cost to read Undo data for a block?
17:19 < Paul_R> by override, could you equally say the over-wrote the old coins? ie. they ceased to exist anymore? seems like i would have heard of that bug by now, so i'm expecting override to not mean overwrite
17:20 < Paul_R> @feli
17:20 < Paul_R> felixweis
17:21 < sipa> Paul_R: read BIP30
17:21 < dhruvm> `UndoReadFromDisk` would imply it's not expected to be in memory and is being read from disk when/if the block has not been pruned.
17:21 < Paul_R> @sipa ok
17:21 < dhruvm> But I haven't actually looked inside that function yet
17:22 < robot-dreams> dhruvm: Yeah, I agree with that! We are gonna be hitting disk.
17:22 < felixweis> I believe its fairly low thanks to the excellent design of UtraPrune™. we only need to read a single additional file which has around ~100 kB of data per block to get all the amount information of all the txins spend in that particular block.
17:23 < dhruvm> And this is only in response to a privileged rpc call, so there's probably no abuse concerns.
17:24 < robot-dreams> felixweis exactly!
17:24 < dhruvm> We don't need to worry about cascading issues even if the read is slow.
17:24 < robot-dreams> dhruvm great point, we probably don't want a P2P message that says "hey peer, read from disk"
17:24 < sipa> i mean: that exists
17:24 < Paul_R> where can i read more about priveleged rpc calls (ie. examples of such)
17:24 < sipa> it's called getdata
17:25 < robot-dreams> sipa: I realized that shortly after I said my previous statement
17:25 < jrawsthorne> I can get your node to give me the entire blockchain over and over again right
17:25 < robot-dreams> Yes jrawsthorne! I stand corrected
17:25 < sipa> Paul_R: he means RPC is only ever exposed to privileged software, so we don't need to worry about DoS potential, i assume
17:26 < dhruvm> sipa: yes, that's what i meant
17:26 < robot-dreams> We'll edit that in post :)
17:26 < sipa> there is no distinction between privileged and unprivileged RPC - it's just that RPC is only intended to be exposed to trusted software
17:26 < sipa> (it can send a shutdown RPC too...)
17:26 < Paul_R> ah
17:27 < robot-dreams> One follow-up question here is, "what are the DoS mitigation mechanisms getdata has that this RPC doesn't"
17:27 < dhruvm> we mitigate the DoS potential of getdata disk access using peer reputation though, i imagine?
17:27 < sipa> dhruvm: nope, the only protection that currently exists is just that an attacker would need to waste N bytes bandwidth to make us read N bytes from disk
17:28 < dhruvm> huh, interesting!
17:28 < robot-dreams> So it's a matter of symmetry between cost to the attacker and cost to the node?
17:28 < sipa> (which is one of the reasons why BIP37 was disabled by default - it enabled an attacker to ask for a block to be read from disk without pretty much any bandwidth at all)
17:29 < robot-dreams> felixweis: going back to IO cost, yup! We read a contiguous section of a `rev?????.dat` file, which contains the serialized `CTxUndo` data (a vector of UTXO info)
17:30 < robot-dreams> I got an estimate of 64kb by adding up the size of all the rev* files and dividing by the number of blocks. Same order of magnitude as your 100kb estimate.
17:30 <@jnewbery> there is some (limited) protection from -maxuploadtarget. It's more to protect bandwidth, but I think probably also protects disk reads indirectly
17:32 < jrawsthorne> Didn't know about that flag
17:32 < robot-dreams> dhruvm: great point to consider DoS potential and sipa: jnewbery: thanks for the extra context on this!
17:33 < robot-dreams> Any final thoughts on DoS before we talk about a world without Undo data?
17:33 < lightlike> sipa: don't we only process a single GETDATA block request each cycle in ProcessMessages - this should mitigate DOS concerns a bit.
17:33 < robot-dreams> Thanks lightlike!
17:34 < emzy> How to test this PR manually. Like with bitcoin-cli? I tested "getblock" and will get an error.
17:34 < sipa> lightlike: somewhat, indeed
17:34 < robot-dreams> OK moving onto the next question, how could we calculate the fee if Undo data didn’t exist for a block, and what’s the IO cost?
17:35 < jrawsthorne> If we had txindex we could find each input by txid and output index
17:35 < emzy> ' bitcoin-cli getblock "$(bitcoin-cli getblockhash 650683)" 2 ' I will get a 'core_write.cpp:251 (TxToUniv)  Internal bug detected: 'MoneyRange(fee)''
17:36 < robot-dreams> emzy: Great catch, thanks for finding that! I definitely want to look into that afterwards.
17:36 < robot-dreams> jrawsthorne: Great! How does that cost compare to reading `rev?????.dat`?
17:37 < robot-dreams> And jrawsthorne described the case where we already have a txindex. How could we get the fee if we didn't turn on txindex?
17:39 <@jnewbery> without an undo file, you'd need to somehow find the txouts in the block files, and they'd be scattered across many blocks
17:39 < jrawsthorne> A lot more expensive, with undo we can read it all at once but with this we'd have to get each tx individually and then find the correct output
17:39 < jrawsthorne> Is there a function for just getting a specific output or is it just the whole tx?
17:39 < robot-dreams> jnewbery: jrawsthorne: right! Even with a txindex that doesn't sound too fun
17:39 < sipa> jrawsthorne: not even
17:40 < sipa> you'd need to read through the entire blockchain
17:40 < nehan> i think you'd have to scan the whole blockchain
17:40 < dhruvm> So `TxToUniv` seems to have access to `CTransaction`. `CTransaction` has `vins` and `vouts`. `vouts` have amount, but `cTxIn` does not - it points to prevout.
17:40 < felixweis> i dont think you can find the the prev_out txs without scanning trough every block
17:40 < robot-dreams> With a txindex: for each spent UTXO we'd need one read from LevelDB, then one read from disk
17:40 < sipa> indeed, that's exactly what the txindex is for
17:40 < robot-dreams> sipa: felixweis: Yeah, I'd agree that without a txindex you'd just have to scan
17:40 < nehan> you could do one scan looking for all the outputs
17:40 < sipa> without it, you need to reconstruct it from scratch
17:41 < sipa> nehan: basically building the txindex :)
17:41 < robot-dreams> All right, so it sounds like using Undo data is a better strategy than "scan the entire blockchain" :)
17:41 < dhruvm> little bit
17:41 < dhruvm> :)
17:41 < felixweis> nehan: yes building a list first of all inputs and then scaning through the chain is a lot mor efficient than the other way around :-)
17:41 < robot-dreams> OK, going onto some more open-ended and possibly stylistic questions here.
17:42 < robot-dreams> What does CHECK_NONFATAL do, and how does it compare to other options we might have like asserts?
17:42 < nehan> question: why not put amounts and/or scriptpks in inputs, besides space? (or is it just space)
17:42 < robot-dreams> When should we consider using each option?
17:42 < jrawsthorne> throws a specific exception that is caught by the rpc code and sent as an error in the response
17:43 < jrawsthorne> if a condition is not met
17:43 < nehan> given that all nodes store undo data anyway, why not just... put it in the blocks?
17:43 < sipa> nehan: define "put it in the blocks"?
17:43 < dhruvm> nehan: when the same data is stored in two places, could it increase the possibility of bugs where the two are inconsistent?
17:43 < sipa> on disk? in p2p? in commitment structure?
17:44 < nehan> sipa: good question! hmm. i guess in this case, in the blocks
17:44 < nehan> that would help with reorgs
17:44 < sipa> nehan: you haven't answered my question :p
17:44 < robot-dreams> nehan: Interesting design question! Yeah, "if we were redesigning from scratch would we just put rev????? data right next to block data"
17:44 < nehan> oh, i meant on disk
17:45 < felixweis> you mean the blk????? files
17:45 < sipa> nehan: i'd say arguably we do
17:45 < sipa> it's just split between blk and rev files
17:45 < sipa> so that the rev files can be deleted sooner
17:45 < nehan> what about in p2p?
17:45 < nehan> i guess the answer to that is bw
17:45 < stacie> when talking about txindex, is it defined as `block_height:index_of_tx_in_block` or `txid:index_of_output` (in terms of finding more details on a vin). I'm guessing it's the former?
17:46 < robot-dreams> jrawsthorne: Yup! Returning an error instead of crashing the node.
17:46 < sipa> nehan: well, that's what utreexo (and cory's predecessor idea to it) do ;)
17:46 < nehan> sipa: yes, was just thinking of that
17:46 < Paul_R> @nehan 'bw'?
17:46 < sipa> bandwidth
17:47 < nehan> here is cory's UHS idea for those who haven't seen it: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-May/015967.html
17:47 < robot-dreams> OK, next is a "UX" question: Knowing the transaction fee is useful, but does only returning it in some circumstances actually provide a better client experience, or is it preferable for clients to always get exactly what they expect?
17:48 < felixweis> stacie: index is I believe txid -> block_height
17:49 < robot-dreams> stacie: Yeah, great question! I agree with felixweis, I think specifically the txindex tells you the file where you can get the block data, as well as some relevant offsets into the file to find the data
17:49 < robot-dreams> Source: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/28168/what-are-the-keys-used-in-the-blockchain-leveldb-ie-what-are-the-keyvalue-pair/29418#29418
17:50 <@jnewbery> the txindex interface takes a txid and returns a blockhash and a CTransactionRef object: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/72affcb16cad45bd9e08ca163b2147fd01b84b70/src/index/txindex.h#L42-L48
17:50 < lightlike> another question: while this PR shows the fees for each tx: would it maybe be useful to also display the total amount of fees spent in a block in the getblock RPC?
17:50 < sipa> it's txid -> (block_file_num, offset_of_block_in_file, offset_of_tx_from_block)
17:50 <@jnewbery> internally, the index actually stores txid->diskpos (ie where in a block file the tx can be found)
17:50 < sipa> iirc
17:51 < robot-dreams> sipa: your recollection agrees with what you previously wrote in the linked StackExchange answer above!
17:51 < felixweis> so pretty much the location of the first byte of the transaction on disk?
17:51 < elle> lightlike: i think that that can already be implied from the coinbase transaction? coinbaseAmt minus blockreward
17:52 < nehan> sipa: i don't know what you mean by the third option, "commitment structure". input data is already committed to in a transaction. somewhere else?
17:52 <@jnewbery> oops actually the name of the object is CDiskTxPos
17:52 < robot-dreams> lightlike: elle: great points! I don't have enough context to know whether we want to provide the extra convenience of such a calculation, or assume RPC clients can do that on their own
17:53 < sipa> nehan: this may be a bit of a tangent, but i think it's easiest to think of blocks and transactions as abstract data structures that are defined by their commitment structure (so a transaction is defined by its txid, witness transaction by its wtxid, block by its block hash, ...), and how/what is exactly stored/sent is implementation detail
17:54 < lightlike> elle: right, that makes more sense :-)
17:54 < sipa> nehan: so in that sense, sennding input data along with blocks isn't making it part of "the block" - it's just auxiliary data that happens to be sent/stored along with it
17:55 < robot-dreams> All right, we have 5 minutes left.
17:55 < dhruvm> robot-dreams: in response to the UX question. when representing the same data in two ways(in this case as fee, and sum(op) - sum(ip)), i worry what happens if a bug makes the two inconsistent. which representation is truth for the client? should a low-level protocol only represent the bare minimum and leave the rest to clients? should the protocol minimize computation needed from clients?
17:55 < dhruvm> tough question.
17:55 < robot-dreams> At this point does anyone have any general questions?
17:55 <@jnewbery> 5 minutes left. Don't be shy!
17:56 < sipa> dhruvm: what do you mean by representing in that context? the fee is never stored explicitly afaik
17:57 < jonatack> if anyone's interested, there was a related review club session in April, "Flush undo files after last block write (validation)" https://bitcoincore.reviews/17994
17:57 < dhruvm> sipa: I mean from the client's perspective. If the fee and sum(op)-sum(ip) ever disagree, the clients should prefer the latter. But explicitly sending them the fee makes it possible that they might not?
17:57 < felixweis> I'm curious about how people feel about Question 6. Should we just return the fee always and not introduce another "verbosity" level? even if there are speed penatlys for the rpc?
17:58 < robot-dreams> felixweis: Yeah, very interesting question. On a similar note I'm also curious if people think we should calculate the fee when a txindex (but not block undo data) is available.
17:59 <@jnewbery> robot-dreams, I don't think that's a realistic scenario. The txindex requires the entire blockchain (i.e. no pruning)
17:59 < felixweis> It would of course not be possible if you have your node pruned beyond the requested block but then wold you request getblock anyway?
17:59 < sipa> dhruvm: what is "the fee"
17:59 < sipa> dhruvm: the fee is defined as sum(out)-sum(in), so i don't know how they could be different
17:59 <@jnewbery> so if you have txindex, you should also have all the undo files. We only prune undo files when we prune the equivalent block files
17:59 < robot-dreams> jnewbery: felixweis: fair points!
18:00 < robot-dreams> All right, we're out of time for today's session.
18:00 < robot-dreams> Thanks so much everyone for joining!
18:00 < dhruvm> sipa: yeah i guess it's just my ocd when representing the same data in two ways. I've experienced bugs from that in the past. Perhaps not something to worry about.
18:00 < robot-dreams> Especially those of you who were able to join us for the first time, welcome again, and I hope to see you around at future sessions!
18:00 <@jnewbery> Thanks robot-dreams!
18:00 < felixweis> thanks robot-dreams! and everynone else participating and lurking.
18:00 < nehan> thanks robot-dreams!
18:00 < sipa> dhruvm: but i still don't understand what you mean by representing
18:01 < stacie> thanks robot-dreams:! Learned a lot
18:01 < robot-dreams> #endmeeting
18:01 < sipa> the fee isn't stored
18:01 < emzy> thanks robot-dreams
18:01 < troygiorshev> thanks robot-dreams!
18:01 < lightlike> thanks!
18:01 < sipa> it's computed as sum(out)-sum(in) whenever needed
18:01 < kristie14> thanks! this was great as a lurker
18:01 < Paul_R> thanks robot-dreams
18:01 < elle> thanks robot-dreams!
18:01 < felixweis> the fee is implicit
18:01 < sipa> thanks!
18:01 < dhruvm> sipa: right. if there's a future bug in that logic is what I'm concerned about.
18:01 < jonatack> thanks robot-dreams, great session!
18:01 < sipa> dhruvm: in what logic?
18:01 < elle> \win 1
18:02 < robot-dreams> dhruvm: Am I understanding that you're talking about "fee for the entire block vs. fee for each individual transaction"?
18:02 < dhruvm> robot-dreams: no, not that.
18:04 < robot-dreams> Got it, thanks
18:05 < emzy> robot-dreams: You have time for my problem?
18:05 < dhruvm> sipa: I am thinking of a future scenario where the server computes fee=sum(op)-sum(ip) incorrectly due to a bug. Now the client receives fee that is different than the formula.
18:05 < robot-dreams> emzy: I will in a bit!
18:05 < felixweis> emzy: i got the same problem
18:06 < emzy> felixweis: good to know :)
18:06 < dhruvm> sipa: But I can also see how that's just paranoia. If there's a bug, we'll fix it. It's not going to be at the storage level since like you said we are not storing anything differently.
18:08 < sipa> dhruvm: who is the server and the client? fees are never sent explicitly
18:08 < dhruvm> sipa: rpc server, rpc client
18:09 < sipa> oh
18:09 < sipa> the rpc client never computes anything
18:09 < sipa> so there can be discrepancy
18:09 < sipa> *no
18:10 < dhruvm> i see. because it merely prints it out.
18:10 < jonatack> dhruvm: the only client-side computation occurs in src/bitcoin-cli.cpp: -getinfo, -netinfo, -generate
18:11 < dhruvm> what about when the rpc client is third party software?
18:11 < sipa> dhruvm: if they implement fee calculation incorrectly, then they have a bug and should fix it
18:11 < sipa> i don't see how that's any worse (or better) than doing whatever else they're doing incorrectly
18:11 < dhruvm> right, that's if we let them do the computation. in this case we are choosing to do the computation for them.
18:12 < sipa> dhruvm: i think you're focussing too much on a consistency problem here; the goal isn't consistency - it's correctness
18:12 < sipa> ask yourself: would it be better or worse if somehow both the server and the client simultaneously introduce the same "bug"
18:12 < sipa> if it's better, then it's a consistency problem
18:12 < sipa> if it's worse, then it's a correctness proble
18:13 < sipa> the goal isn't that two computations end up with the same result per se - the goal is that the fee is correctly calculated, everywhere, and that implies that all implementations will come to the same conclusion
18:13 < sipa> but just ending up with the same conclusion isn't the actual goal
18:14 < dhruvm> oh wow, that's a mindset shift. that makes a TON of sense.
18:15 < sipa> something like bitcoin block validation is in many ways not a correctness problem - there are plenty of weird deviations from the consensus rules that could be accidentally made, as long as everyone makes the same deviations
18:15 < sipa> but here "the fee" is a well defined thing, and if you implement something that doesn't match the definition, you're wrong, period
18:15 < dhruvm> because there's a mutual understanding of the protocol, and that's what matters more than any implementation detail.
18:15 < emzy> sipa: but someone needs to be the reference.
18:16 < sipa> emzy: i hereby decree that The Fee is defined as the sum of transaction outputs' values minus the sum of the values of the outputs spent by the transaction's input.
18:16 < sipa> Done.
18:16 < emzy> :)
18:16 < dhruvm> emzy: i think what sipa is saying is that it's well understood sum(op)-sum(ip) is the definition of fee. now, if there's a bug on rpc server, or rpc client, that doesn't matter as much.
18:16 < emzy> Yes this is a easy one.
18:17 < dhruvm> Thank you for teaching us, sipa!
18:17 < sipa> np
{% endirc %}
