---
layout: pr
date: 2020-10-28
title: "De-globalize ChainstateManager"
pr: 20158
authors: [dongcarl]
components: ["consensus"]
host: dongcarl
status: past
commit: 09daa42b
---

## Notes
    
- This is a draft PR which removes the `g_chainman` global variable and
  `::Chain{,state}Active()` functions in favor of having callers either use or
  obtain local references to the relevant consensus-related object
  (`ChainstateManager`, `CChainState`, `CChain`, `BlockManager`, etc.).

- Prior to this PR, there were numerous references to the `g_chainman` global
  variable and `::Chain{,state}Active()` functions, some of them even in
  contexts where a local `ChainstateManager` reference existed.

- This PR is a first step towards encapsulating our consensus engine, which
  allows for:

  - Clearer visibility into what currently lies in consensus codepaths **and**
  what depends on our consensus engine

  - Coalescing duplicate consensus initialization codepaths, mitigating
    against bugs that arise out of test/non-test initialization
    inconsistencies

- Some historical context can be gleaned from:

  - The introduction of `CChainState` in [PR 10279](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10279)

  - The introduction of `BlockManager` in [PR 16194](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16194)

  - The introduction of `ChainstateManager` in [PR 17737](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17737)

  - The addition of the `chainman` pointer to `NodeContext` in [PR 18698](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18698)

## Questions

1. Did you review the PRs? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review).

2. How did the PRs linked in the historical context notes change the
   organization of `validation.cpp`? What kind of state/logic now belongs in
   each consensus-related object (`ChainstateManager`, `CChainState`,
   `BlockManager`)?

3. Where and how are the aforementioned consensus-related objects initialized?

4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using global variables and
   functions?

5. Why are the first few fix commits in the branch necessary? Why does the
   previous code work prior to de-globalizing `g_chainman` and why doesn't it
   work now without the fix?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 < dongcarl> #startmeeting
17:00 < jamesob> hi
17:00 < b10c> hi
17:00 < dongcarl> hello!
17:00 < michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 < emzy> hi
17:00 <@jnewbery> Hi folks! Welcome to Bitcoin Core PR Review Club. Feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
17:00 < rav3n> hi
17:00 < elle> hi!
17:00 < dappdever> hello
17:00 <@jnewbery> (or don't. Lurkers are also welcome!)
17:00 <@jnewbery> Anyone here for the first time?
17:01 < dappdever> I am!
17:01 < troygiorshev> hi!
17:01 < dongcarl> Welcome!
17:01 <@jnewbery> dappdever: welcome!
17:01 < Klopp> Hi allI am new (as a lurker)
17:01 < dongcarl> Alright, let's get started. I think this is the first Draft PR?
17:01 < dongcarl> Did everyone get a chance to review the PR? How about a quick y/n from everyone
17:02 < dappdever> y
17:02 < troygiorshev> y partial :D
17:02 < elle> y
17:02 < Klopp> n
17:02 < rav3n> n
17:02 < emzy> y
17:02 < b10c> n
17:02 <@jnewbery> 5/82 y
17:02 < michaelfolkson> At a high level
17:02 < dongcarl> Hehe it is quite a chonky one
17:02 < dongcarl> Let's delve into the questions!
17:02 < jonatack> hi
17:02 < MarcoFalke> 3/82 and concept
17:03 < dongcarl> At a high level: Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK, or NACK?
17:03 < washroom> hi
17:03 < jonatack> will look at it after release branch-off
17:03 < jamesob> n
17:03 < jamesob> Concept ACK
17:04 < emzy> Concept ACK
17:04 < elle> Concept ACK
17:04 <@jnewbery> Big big concept ACK
17:04 < MarcoFalke> Concept ACK
17:04 < dappdever> concept ack
17:04 < troygiorshev> Concept ACK
17:04 < dongcarl> Alright, let's get into the details
17:05 < nehan> hi
17:05 < michaelfolkson> Concept ACK (assuming I've understood it). Is "consensus engine" another term for "libconsensus"?
17:05 < dongcarl> Oh good question!
17:05 < dongcarl> The way I've thought about it is that "consensus engine" is an encapsulation of how our consensus code works _currently_
17:06 < dongcarl> Next Q: How did the PRs linked in the historical context notes change the organization of validation.cpp? What kind of state/logic now belongs in each consensus-related object (ChainstateManager, CChainState, BlockManager)?
17:08 < dongcarl> For those needing a link: https://bitcoincore.reviews/20158
17:08 < michaelfolkson> BlockManager is chainstate agnostic block metadata
17:08 < elle> CChainState now owns mempool, blockfeeestimator and other things that represent our local view of the best chain.
17:08 < dappdever> It seems to have compartmentalized logic into objects, de-coupling a bit
17:08 < troygiorshev> CChainState is what will eventually become the libconsensus.  It hold everything related to the curent tip of the chain.
17:09 < jamesob> troygiorshev: CChainstate and not ChainstateManager?
17:09 < MarcoFalke> jamesob: assumeutxo is not yet merged ;)
17:09 < jamesob> heh
17:10 < dongcarl> dappdever: You're right on that one! You can take a look at validation pre-10279 to see its state
17:10 < dongcarl> I call validation pre-10279 the "primordial soup of validation globals"
17:10 < troygiorshev> jamesob: yeah I think!  Everything to do with, say, connecting blocks is part of CChainState?  Might be CChainstate through ChainstateManager
17:10 < michaelfolkson> They both have chainstate in them though right? I want to understand the MarcoFalke joke
17:11 <@jnewbery> ChainstateManager can hold multiple chains. It was introduced as part of the assumeutxo project
17:11 < jamesob> at the moment, there's only one chainstate running around. But eventually there may be multiple. In any case, at the moment ChainstateManager is responsible for constructing chainstates, which involves e.g. injecting a BlockManager instance
17:12 <@jnewbery> currently there's only one chain - the chain that we consider to be the best. With assumeutxo, there would be multiple chains
17:12 < washroom> would ChainstateManager allow the daemon to run mainnet and signet simultaneously?
17:12 <@jnewbery> washroom: no
17:12 < dongcarl> elle michaelfolkson troygiorshev: True as well. A very rough approximation I have in my head: BlockManager = the blockchain/metadata, CChainState = everything related to current tip (UTXO, etc)
17:12 < michaelfolkson> Multiple chains ie the one we are assuming is ok from tip and the chain we are validating in the background?
17:12 <@jnewbery> All the chains would be running the same consensus parameters
17:12 < michaelfolkson> Surely you don't need more than two....
17:12 < jamesob> michaelfolkson: right
17:13 < nehan> multiple chains mean multiple mempools too?
17:13 < dongcarl> jamesob is quite the expert here, as he write two of the 4 PRs linked!
17:13 < jamesob> michaelfolkson: in concept, you could have n chainstates and validate n separate regions of the chain historically, simultaneously (maybe with something like utreexo) but that's way off
17:13 < washroom> jnewbery michaelfolkson ah I see now, a method to assess all available chain tips
17:14 <@jnewbery> hi nehan! No, only one mempool. We only have a mempool for transactions that we think can be added to the best current chain
17:14 < troygiorshev> dongcarl: and an eventual libconsensus api would most closely follow which class?  CChainSate, no?
17:15 < washroom> mempool would just pertain to chain-tip extension rather than assessing or constructing branching consensus-equivalent chains -- right?
17:15 < jamesob> troygiorshev: if I had to guess, probably none - it would be some functional layer that accesses chainstate objects through the chainmanager... but defer to dongcarl there
17:15 < dongcarl> troygiorshev: I don't like to speculate about eventual APIs, because we're sooooo far from that right now. BUT I think a good intermediary goal is to encapsulate ChainstateManager and its dependencies first!
17:16 <@jnewbery> dongcarl: I agree. If there's obvious incremental improvements, we should do them, regardless of what the end state could be
17:16 < troygiorshev> jamesob dongcarl: ok!
17:17 <@jnewbery> even if we never get to libconsensus, simply cleaning up/encapsulating/modularizing are very beneficial
17:17 < washroom> +1
17:17 < dongcarl> jnewbery: +1
17:17 < dongcarl> Alright, feel free to keep discussing but here's the next topic: Where and how are the aforementioned consensus-related objects initialized?
17:17 < michaelfolkson> washroom: The start of the statement is right. But the assumeutxo project is validating from genesis in the background while assuming the tip is ok
17:18 < michaelfolkson> (Or at least the vanilla version is. And it isn't merged yet)
17:18 < dongcarl> bonus if you can identify some differences between constructing (as in C++ constructors) and initializing!
17:21 < dongcarl> Carl's tip for codebase navigation: try out sourcetrail! It's like grep, but you can click around and it understands C++/Python/etc
17:21 < troygiorshev> +1
17:22 < jamesob> hint: init.cpp
17:22 <@jnewbery> Construction means something very specific in C++. It's the operations that get called when a new object gets instantiated. Those operations include the initialization list, the constructor functions of any base classes and the constructor function of the class itself
17:22 < troygiorshev> ChainstateManager is a global g_chainman in validation.cpp, which is then pointed to by the NodeContext node in AppInitMain in init.cpp
17:23 <@jnewbery> I think initialization is more vague and means 'make sure the object is ready to use'
17:24 < troygiorshev> g_chainman is constructed, er, at some point before main() is run?
17:24 <@jnewbery> troygiorshev: yes, exactly
17:24 < dongcarl> troygiorshev: Yes!
17:24  * troygiorshev wipes sweat
17:24 <@jnewbery> we don't have control over when global objects are constructed, and it could even be before main()
17:25 < michaelfolkson> I thought initialization did not infer the initialized object was in a usable state. Just that it was initialized
17:25 < sipa> jnewbery: it has to be before main
17:25 < dongcarl> michaelfolkson: This is correct -> "construction did not infer the constructed object was in a usable state. Just that it was constructed"
17:26 < troygiorshev> sipa: as long as it's a global in the global namespace, right?
17:26 < sipa> troygiorshev: right
17:26 <@jnewbery> often, initialization happens during construction, but if initialization requires some context, then obviously we can't initialize the object during construction if it's a global
17:27 < sipa> jnewbery: what do you mean by initialization in this context?
17:28 < dongcarl> Exactly what jnewbery said! If a variable is a global, and it needs some context to get initialized to steady state, then we need a two-step initialization. See: InitializeChainstate
17:29 < sipa> oh, initialization as in an application-level concept, ok
17:29 < dongcarl> Ah I should clarify, what I mean by initialization is "making the object ready to use/at stead-state"
17:29 < dongcarl> Yup!
17:29 <@jnewbery> sipa: I mean things like what dongcarl said. Make the object ready to use.
17:30 < dongcarl> So ChainstateManager is constructed as a global and initialized in init.cpp... Anywhere else it's initialized?
17:30 < jamesob> (fwiw, here's the C++ definition of initialization: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/initialization)
17:30 <@jnewbery> sipa: does this: https://stackoverflow.com/a/1271692/933705 only apply to objects with internal linkage? ie if they're in the global namespace then the have to be constructed before main?
17:31 < sipa> jnewbery: it may also be outdated; C++11 added guarantees around initialization order
17:32 <@jnewbery> sipa: ah. thanks!
17:32 <@jnewbery> jamesob: I think that's just for simple types. It doesn't say anything about classes
17:32 < sipa> ah, they may be right - that globals are only guaranteed to be initialized before calling any function in the same compilation unit
17:32 < dappdever> @dongcarl it seems that init.cpp is the only caller of InitiatilizeChainState
17:33 < dongcarl> Hint for my small q: take a look at how our test framework starts up
17:34 < dappdever> copied from the global chainman?
17:34 < troygiorshev> c++ stackoverflow being outdated about a compilation question really embodies spooky season
17:34 < sipa> jnewbery: c++11 added a guarantee that local static variables are only initialized once, even when the function is called simultaneously from multiple threads for the first time
17:35 < nehan> testing setup calls it
17:35 < dongcarl> dappdever: Not copied, per se, but in both init and TestingSetup, we point node.chainman to the g_chainman!
17:35 < dongcarl> nehan: Bingo!
17:36 < dappdever> ah, yes, got it!
17:36 < dongcarl> The reason why this is important from a higher level is to realize that we've got two different initialization codepaths
17:36 < dongcarl> And because of that, it is possible to have differences between how our test framework initializes, and how our software actually works
17:37 < nehan> can you talk more about that? why does the test setup do this outside of initializing a node?
17:37 < nehan> oh -- these are the C++ tests. nevermind.
17:37 < dongcarl> nehan: Hehe yeah, it _is_ initializing a node!
17:38 < dongcarl> Okay, let's get to the next one!
17:38 < nehan> followup question: why does the code path for the test setup "count" as a different code path that one should care about?
17:38 < MarcoFalke> Ideally the unit tests would re-use most of the init.cpp logic
17:38 < dongcarl> nehan: Because I don't think the test framework ever calls AppInitMain
17:38 < nehan> MarcoFalke: would that require factoring it out of main()?
17:39 < nehan> dongcarl: right, that. why not?
17:39 <@jnewbery> nehan: take a look at setup_common to see how the unit tests set up their environment
17:39 < michaelfolkson> MarcoFalke: Unless you're testing the init.cpp logic. But that would be functional testing...?
17:40 < troygiorshev> Is this a consious choice (along the lines of keeping Arrange Act Assert separate) or is it force on us?
17:40 < MarcoFalke> Well, if the unit tests need to spin up a node, they should do it as similar as AppInitMain as possible
17:40 < dongcarl> I'm not sure there's a reason why it's done the way it is right now. However, what I think would be a nice goal to have: an initialization codepath that's used by all binaries with the right toggles.
17:41 <@jnewbery> Take a look at the logic inside init.cpp. A lot of the code there is actually initializing the individual sub-components. We need to do the same setup inside our unit tests, otherwise we're not actually testing the code paths that run in production
17:41 < dappdever> do the new chainmanager tests use the same setup code?  It seems like they no longer use the global instance (?)
17:41 < troygiorshev> dongcarl jnewbery: ok thanks
17:41 < dongcarl> As always jnewbery, puts it nicely :-)
17:42 < dongcarl> Let's move on to the next one so we have time!
17:42 <@jnewbery> I think it'd be nice if as much of the initialization of the subcomponents was done within those subcomponents, perhaps inside the constructor function. That way the unit tests could just instantiate that subcomponent and know that it's testing what will actually run on the live system
17:42 < dongcarl> What are the advantages and disadvantages of using global variables and functions?
17:42 < MarcoFalke> jnewbery: Indeed. And removing globals helps there
17:43 < dongcarl> dappdever: Take a look here! :-) https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158/commits/5cb0350d5c1e14c3cd6153bd9166b80c53b12f83
17:43 <@jnewbery> And then of course we'd be able to unit test units of our code, without worrying about global state interfering
17:43 < MarcoFalke> advantage of globals would be less verbosity in code and if there can only be one instance of an object, passing it around explicitly doesn't help code clarity
17:43 < elle> dongcarl: advantages: easy access from all over. disadvantages: easy access from all over. Plus: hard to mock for tests. Also: not always known if the object is yet initialised (in its steady state)
17:43 < troygiorshev> advantage: can access from anywhere.  disadvantage: can access from anywhere...
17:44 <@jnewbery> troygiorshev: :)
17:44 < dongcarl> elle: Hehe exactly!
17:44 < troygiorshev> elle: well said!
17:44 < dappdever> if globals can be modified from anywhere, it seems like a security risk
17:44 < michaelfolkson> Lots of disadvantages mostly covered. Thread safety too
17:44 < nehan> it's easy to get lazy and not have good encapsulation and abstraction
17:45 < michaelfolkson> Getting rid of globals is also a pain
17:45 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: I'd say thread safety is another orthogonal issue
17:45 < dongcarl> nehan: ...and end up needing a 80 commit PR to clean it up haha
17:46 < sipa> dongcarl: squash it all
17:46 < MarcoFalke> Our NodeContext is not thread safe. It just happens to be modified in at most one thread at a time
17:46 < sipa> (not a serious suggestion)
17:46 < dongcarl> I like what I'm hearing from everyone
17:47 < dappdever> do globals perform better because there is less initiatlization?
17:47 < nehan> is there a reason setup_common.cpp doesn't call AppInitMain()? what makes it hard to do so, if anything?
17:47 < michaelfolkson> I guess I'm saying use of globals can impact thread safety but avoiding them doesn't guarantee it MarcoFalke
17:47 < dongcarl> nehan: Hmmm... Don't think there is. MarcoFalke?
17:48 < MarcoFalke> nehan: Good question. I think AppInitMain does too much (like calling weird compat code I don't understand)
17:48 < dongcarl> dappdever: Since initialization is mostly a one-and-done affair, the performance impact is not something we'd be too concerned about. I also doubt there's any performance gains to be made from being global.
17:48 < nehan> seems like that would be best, if possible, to test the initialization flow (as you pointed out)
17:49 < MarcoFalke> AppInitMain also parses from the argsmanager, but unit tests historically didn't use "command line" args for initialization
17:49 < dongcarl> nehan: Agreed, this is definitely in my list of followup projects :-)
17:50 < dongcarl> Alright the last one is a little tricky, so let's leave some time for it!
17:50 < nehan> dongcarl: ok! I haven't looked closely yet at the differences between TestingSetup() and AppInitMain() but will do so
17:50 < dongcarl> Why are the first few fix commits in the branch necessary? Why does the previous code work prior to de-globalizing g_chainman and why doesn’t it work now without the fix?
17:50 <@jnewbery> nehan: At that point, you're arguably not unit testing - it'd be closer to integration testing
17:50 < dongcarl> I'm talking about https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158/commits/22d44a3caf47701a7d16761751563e446e5f2bdf
17:50 <@jnewbery> with unit testing you want to be able to isolate each individual component
17:50 < dongcarl> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158/commits/e4be2ad63c4acbe22266174cac77caf7ce5d9215
17:50 < dongcarl> and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20158/commits/1ca9317560335cf0f2cb8d69d2c12edc7b6d1526
17:51 < nehan> jnewbery: one could think of it as unit testing the initialization function. i'm not sure it's in any way bad to test the same code path used in actual use, if possible.
17:51 < MarcoFalke> good point jnewbery. AppInitMain should also be split up to accomodate the testing setups that don't need all the node components.
17:51 < nehan> MarcoFalke: yeah, maybe it can be split up so the unit tests can use pieces
17:52 < dongcarl> COALESCE THE INIT CODEPATHS 2020
17:52 < MarcoFalke> Most tests don't even need a chain. (low level net tests for example)
17:52 < MarcoFalke> dongcarl: good luck getting that done in 2020 ;)
17:53 <@jnewbery> nehan: yes, a unit test that tests initialization is fine. But you shouldn't need to initialize the whole system if you just want to test one or a few subcomponent
17:53 < nehan> dongcarl: i will make hats
17:53 < dongcarl> Hehe
17:53 < nehan> jnewbery: agreed!
17:53 < sipa> dongcarl: last-minute presidential campaign?
17:53 < dongcarl> For those looking at the first few commits: please ignore "test: Add new ChainTestingSetup and use it"
17:53 < jamesob> sipa: I'm writing him in regardless
17:54 < dongcarl> legoooo
17:55 < dappdever> @dongcarl are the tests using the same instance of m_node across tests, whereas before each tests was creating the chain from a new node instance?
17:57 < dongcarl> dappdever: Close! It does have something to do with m_node. It's mostly because after this PR, the code will now reach for the chainman inside the local context instead of g_chainman. So it's important that the local node context contains the chainman we want to work with instead of not having one!
17:57 < dongcarl> Alright we're nearing the end now!
17:58 < dongcarl> I want to thank everyone who came out and participated, jnewbery for organizing!
17:58 <@jnewbery> Anyone have any last minute questions?
17:58 < dongcarl> Any last questions?
17:58 < dongcarl> Heh
17:58 < troygiorshev> when undraft and merge
17:58 < washroom> wait there are voters who didn't write in dongcarl ?
17:58 < dongcarl> Surprised me too!
17:59 < washroom> : P
17:59 < dongcarl> troygiorshev: As soon as I'm 100% that it's bug-free!
17:59 <@jnewbery> dongcarl: how do you plan to get this merged? are you going to slice off parts of it into smaller PRs?
17:59 < MarcoFalke> dongcarl: How are you going to split up the pull?
18:00 < dongcarl> Aha! I think the FIX commits will definitely be split off first. Those are very easy.
18:00 < troygiorshev> not all of us are ryanofsky and can review it all in one go :)
18:00 < michaelfolkson> 82 commits. Split into groups of 5 haha
18:00 < michaelfolkson> (Joke)
18:00 < dongcarl> I can split out the rest of the commits into 7 bundles for review and discussions.
18:01 < dongcarl> However, I would hope that we can get it merged in quick succession
18:01 < dongcarl> As a lot of the benefits come from the latter bundles of commits
18:01 < dongcarl> Oh time's up!
18:01 <@jnewbery> dongcarl: great. Feel free to announce them in this channel so people know where to look
18:01 < dongcarl> jnewbery: Will do!
18:01 < dongcarl> #endmeeting
18:01 < washroom> ty dongcarl
18:01 < troygiorshev> thanks dongcarl!
18:01 < emzy> Thank you dongcarl, jnewbery and all.
18:01 < nehan> thanks!
18:01 <@jnewbery> Thanks Carl. That was great!
18:01 < dappdever> thank you!~
18:01 < dongcarl> Thank y'all!
18:02 < michaelfolkson> Thanks dongcarl!
18:04 < jonatack> Thank you, Carl! 🏆
{% endirc %}
