---
layout: pr
date: 2020-09-16
title: "Net: CNetAddr: add support to (un)serialize as ADDRv2"
pr: 19845
authors: [vasild, dongcarl]
components: ["p2p"]
host: jonatack
status: past
commit: 3eef1e6
---

## Notes

### Motivation

- Today's PR 19845 is part of [PR
  19031](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19031), a proposed
  implementation of the
  [BIP155](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/9286b5254317d9e73fb25c5f0acd2b2d9937843e/bip-0155.mediawiki)
  `addrv2` message.

- `addrv2` is a new p2p message format proposed in early 2019 by Wladimir J. van
  der Laan to support networks that have longer endpoint addresses than fit in
  the 128 bits/16 bytes of the current `addr` message.

- [Issue 18884 "Tor v3
  support"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/18884) is the meta-issue
  for tracking overall progress on BIP155 and its implementation.

- This work is urgent because Tor v2 was deprecated yesterday (September 15,
  2020) with 0.4.4.x and will be obsoleted in 0.4.6.x (July 15, 2021). Tor v2 is
  expected to be completely disabled in Tor client stable versions on October
  15, 2021 as [announced
  here](https://blog.torproject.org/v2-deprecation-timeline): "From today (July
  2nd, 2020), the Internet has around 16 months to migrate from onion services
  v2 to v3 once and for all."

- Why is Tor v2 EOL? According to [this Tor mailing list
  post](https://lists.torproject.org/pipermail/tor-dev/2020-June/014365.html):
  "To very quickly summarize why we are deprecating, in one word: Safety. Onion
  service v2 uses RSA1024 and 80 bit SHA1 (truncated) addresses. It also still
  uses the TAP handshake which has been entirely removed from Tor for many years
  now _except_ v2 services. Its simplistic directory system exposes it to a
  variety of enumeration and location-prediction attacks that give HSDir relays
  too much power to enumerate or even block v2 services. Finally, v2 services
  are not being developed nor maintained anymore. Only the most severe security
  issues are being addressed."

- A [previous review club meeting discussing the parent PR 19031](/19031)
  provides more background and context.

### Network address types newly recognized by PR 19845

  - [Next-generation Tor v3 Onion
  addresses](https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/doc/NextGenOnions) -
    "Better crypto (replaced SHA1/DH/RSA1024 with SHA3/ed25519/curve25519),
    improved directory protocol leaking much less information to directory
    servers, a smaller surface for targeted attacks, better onion address
    security against impersonation, and a more extensible introduction/rendezvous
    protocol."

  - [Invisible Internet Project (I2P)](https://geti2p.net) - "The I2P network
    provides strong privacy protections for communication over the
    Internet. Many activities that would risk your privacy on the public
    Internet can be conducted anonymously inside I2P."

  - [Cjdns](https://github.com/cjdelisle/cjdns) - "Cjdns implements an encrypted
    IPv6 network using public-key cryptography for address allocation and a
    distributed hash table for routing. This provides near-zero-configuration
    networking, and prevents many of the security and scalability issues that
    plague existing networks."

  - With PR 19845, you can make peer connections to these network address types
    by using the `addnode` RPC or the `-addnode` / `-connect` configuration
    options. Here's how:
      - `./src/bitcoin-cli help addnode`
      - `./src/bitcoind -h | grep -A4 "\-addnode=\|\-connect="`

   - For *rumouring* these address types, more is needed. For instance, PR
    19954---the remaining step of 19031---enables running bitcoind as a Tor v3
    service.

### Technical Notes

- Today's PR 19845 adds the ability to serialize and deserialize internet
  addresses in `addrv2` format. It also adds Tor v3 address parsing and builds
  on just-merged [PR 19841](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19841),
  "Implement Keccak and SHA3_256". The latter is needed for Tor v3 support, as
  the conversion from BIP155 encoding to .onion notation uses an SHA3-based
  checksum.

- The `addrv2` feature is enabled by OR-ing an integer flag, `ADDRV2_FORMAT`
  ([code](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19845/files#diff-76d15e11a95be7a4aee1eb89de6098caR32)),
  into the stream version.

- The PR makes use of the custom `Span` type, which was introduced into Bitcoin
  Core in [PR 12886](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12886) and
  represents a vector-like view to a range of contiguous elements in memory
  analogous to `std::span` in C++20. If you are not familiar with `Span`, it was
  discussed in a [recent review club meeting](/18468).

- Tor v3 address parsing should follow [this
  spec](https://gitweb.torproject.org/torspec.git/tree/rend-spec-v3.txt#n2135),
  which is also summarized
  [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/9286b5254317d9e73fb25c5f0acd2b2d9937843e/bip-0155.mediawiki#appendix-b-tor-v3-address-encoding)
  in the BIP.

## Questions

1. Warm-up question #1: Visually, how can you tell the difference between a Tor
   v2 and v3 address?

2. Warm-up question #2: List all the network address types that Bitcoin Core
   can support after this PR. What is the size in bytes (address length) for
   each of them? What is the maximum address length Bitcoin Core will be able to
   support?

3. Warm-up question #3: Is `addrv2` deserialization faster or slower than v1? By
   roughly how much?

4. Did you review the PR? Bonus: Did anyone also review [PR
   19841](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19841), "Implement Keccak and
   SHA3_256"?

5. What steps did you take to review this PR? Did you review on GitHub, or in
   your local dev environment? Did you review commit-by-commit, or the whole
   diff? What did you review first: the code, the tests, or
   [BIP155](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/9286b5254317d9e73fb25c5f0acd2b2d9937843e/bip-0155.mediawiki)?
   Did you verify that the code corresponds to the spec for each network address
   type? Any thoughts on the test coverage?  Do you see anything that is not tested or
   could also be tested?

6. When should the new `sendaddrv2` message type, aka "send me addrv2", be sent?

7. What does this implementation do if an unknown or non-validateable network
   address type is encountered? How about a known network with wrong length? Are
   these considered misbehavior? Discouraged? Not relayed? Ignored? Why?

8. What is meant by "variable-length addresses" in BIP155 and when referring to
   `addrv2`?

9. How will the new address formats be saved in `peers.dat`, which currently
   persists addresses in 16-byte IPv6 format?

10. Why was the boolean `pad` parameter added to `EncodeBase32()`?

11. How do you think Bitcoin Core should make the transition from Tor v2 to v3?
    All at once, or v3 first opt-in, then default (and v2 opt-in or deprecated)?
    In which releases?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <jonatack> #startmeeting
19:00 <@jnewbery> hi
19:00 <jonatack> Hi all! Welcome to this week's episode of the Bitcoin Core PR Review club!
19:00 <jonatack> #topic This week, we are looking at PR 19845 - "Net: CNetAddr: add support to (un)serialize as ADDRv2" (p2p)
19:00 <jonatack> Please refer to https://bitcoincore.reviews/19845 that contains notes and questions regarding today's meeting and PR.
19:00 <urethane> hi
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:00 <gzhao408> hai
19:00 <brikk> hi
19:00 <jonatack> Anyone here for the first time?
19:00 <shaunsun> hi
19:01 <emzy> hi
19:01 <troygiorshev> hi
19:01 <jonatack> Let's multithread this and dig in. Warm-up question #1: Visually, how can you tell the difference between a Tor v2 and v3 address?
19:01 <dongcarl> hi
19:02 <vasild> hi
19:02 <jonatack> Warm-up question #2: List all the network address types that Bitcoin Core can support after this PR. What is the size in bytes (address length) for each of them? hint: src/netaddress.h::95-114
19:02 <emzy> Lengh of the onion address.
19:02 <shaunsun> v3 is longer right?
19:02 <pinheadmz> hi!
19:02 <sipa> hi.
19:02 <urethane> v3 is much longer
19:02 <jonatack> emzy: shaunsun: urethane: yes
19:02 <michaelfolkson> 32 bytes vs 10 bytes
19:02 <jonatack> A tor v2 address is 15 characters in length, not counting the .onion suffix: 57qr3yd1nyntf5k.onion
19:02 <jonatack> A tor v3 address is 56 characters:  7zvj7a2imdgkdbg4f2dryd5rgtrn7upivr5eeij4cicjh65pooxeshid.onion
19:03 <jonatack> (visually)
19:03 <urethane> e.g. openpgp.org  v3: zkaan2xfbuxia2wpf7ofnkbz6r5zdbbvxbunvp5g2iebopbfc4
19:03 <emzy> ipv4, ipv6, torv2, torv3, I2P, CJDNS.
19:03 <urethane> .onion
19:03 <sipa> it's that much longer because it's not just the payload going from 10 to 32 bytes, but also a version number and checksum are added
19:04 <jonatack> emzy: right, ipv4 4 bytes; ipv6 16 bytes; torv2 10 bytes; torv3 32 bytes; i2p 32 bytes; cjdns 16 bytes
19:04 <jonatack> Question 2 *BONUS*: describe any changes going from addrv1 to addrv2, in the size of addrv1-supported addresses, e.g. ipv4, ipv6, torv2?
19:04 <vasild> also "internal" is supported :)
19:05 <nehan> hi
19:05 <sipa> cjdns could be 15 bytes, i think?
19:05 <vasild> ah, right!
19:05 <pinheadmz> the serialization of all adress types is different in addrv2
19:05 <michaelfolkson> Is it padded to make it 16?
19:06 <pinheadmz> UnserializeV1Stream() vs UnserializeV2Stream() in netaddress.h
19:06 <vasild> hmm, do we want to rely on the fact that they will never change the 1 byte prefix to something else?
19:06 <sipa> michaelfolkson: cjdns nominally uses IPv6 addresses in range fc00::/8
19:06 <sipa> since the first byte is always 0xfc, we could drop it from relay, as it's already explicitly tagged with the cjdns marker
19:06 <sipa> vasild: good question; perhaps not worth it
19:07 <jonatack> Anyone wish to describe changes going from addrv1 to addrv2, in the size of addrv1-supported addresses?
19:08 <pinheadmz> oh are we not using 16 bytes for ipv4 anymore?
19:08 <pinheadmz> because we have more speciifc types instead of trying to use 16 bytes for "everything"
19:08 <sipa> pinheadmz: indeed!
19:08 <jonatack> no, it's now much smaller
19:08 <jonatack> significantly
19:08 ⚡ pinheadmz fist bump booyah
19:09 <jonatack> ipv4: 16 -> 6 bytes
19:09 <jonatack> ipv6: 16 -> 18 bytes
19:09 <jonatack> oops, it's bigger, but...
19:09 <jonatack> torv2: 16 -> 12 bytes
19:09 <jonatack> estimate the bandwidth savings
19:10 ⚡ urethane dreams of gigamegs
19:10 <urethane> lol
19:10 <jonatack> iirc vasild estimated ~ half less bandwidth in a recent irc discussion
19:10 <vasild> http://www.erisian.com.au/bitcoin-core-dev/log-2020-09-11.html#l-478
19:11 <jonatack> Quick: What is the maximum address length Bitcoin Core will be able to support?
19:11 <vasild> hmm, is there a way to dump all addrman database in a human readable form?
19:11 <michaelfolkson> 512
19:11 <wiz> hmm, I guess it's not possible to fit a v3 onion in a DNS Seed unless we implement TXT records or something eh
19:11 <emzy> 512 bytes
19:12 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: yes!
19:12 <vasild> wiz: right
19:12 <michaelfolkson> Which is....huge
19:12 <jonatack> wiz: right
19:12 <wumpus> that is true, though, DNS seeds are unusable through tor anyhow
19:12 <sipa> wiz: indeed, but on the other hand... if you're using tor you probably don't want to use DNS seeds (directly) in the first place (and bitcoin core doesn't)
19:13 <wumpus> that ^^
19:13 <sipa> instead we ask an exit node to do the resolving, connect to one of the seed's results, send it a getaddr, and disconnect when the response comes back
19:13 <sipa> which will transparently keep working for addrv2, and support torv3 just fine
19:13 <wumpus> (this is also, in general, the case for other overlay networks)
19:14 <jonatack> Question: did you review the PR? (y / n)
19:14 <jonatack> y
19:14 <wiz> so what's the purpose of the onioncat encoded AAAA records that start with fd87:d87e:eb43::/48 then? totally unused?
19:14 <pinheadmz> y
19:14 <emzy> sipa: so without clearnet nodes this will not work. But clearnet is not dead yet.
19:14 <urethane>  wumpus is it "DNS seeds are unusable through tor anyhow" or DNS seeds are ill-advised given user expectations of a node operator using tor?
19:14 <sipa> wiz: relay of onion addresses to non-tor nodes
19:14 <emzy> y (only tested)
19:15 <wiz> okay, so do we still want to support that for v3 onions in some new encoding or TXT records?
19:15 <wumpus> urethane: they are not usable through Tor. You can do DNS lookups through Tor (through a SOCKS5 extension), in principle, but not the kind of query that returns multiple results.
19:15 <sipa> wiz: that would be a ton of work, i'm afraid
19:15 <sipa> (as in: implement our own dns resolver that works over tor...)
19:16 <urethane> wumpus ty
19:16 <wumpus> urethane: they're also super-unreliable, because it's controlled by exit nodes
19:16 <wumpus> wiz: no, I think that's not necessary
19:16 <urethane> wumpus that's the security fallibility I thought you were referring to
19:16 <troygiorshev> n
19:17 <wumpus> emzy: it works without clearnet nodes; in that case it would rely on the hardcoded onion seeds in the source code though
19:18 <wumpus> (which is okay, some are just as reliable as the DNS seeds)
19:18 <shaunsun> partial y (was able to connect to v3 addresses)
19:18 <jonatack> shaunsun: nice
19:19 <pinheadmz> doesn't tor work with some kind of directory nodes to help route?
19:19 <emzy> wumpus: I will make a mental note to set one up then.
19:19 <pinheadmz> like isnt there a tor version of DNS in that sense
19:20 <sipa> pinheadmz: yes, but for hidden services and relays (I think) - not DNS
19:20 <wumpus> correct, Tor doesn't use names (for anything besides routing through exit nodes), only public keys
19:20 <pinheadmz> sure bc theres no IPs in tor anyway really - but see what im getting at? could there be a bitcoin core tor directory that served bootstrapping nodes over tor?
19:21 <pinheadmz> er, i guess thats the same as just connecting to a seed node over tor and getting addr messages
19:21 <emzy> pinheadmz: I think you can see a hardcodes onion seed as a dnsseed for tor.
19:21 <wumpus> but why? any node can give you other peers, it's decentralized on purpose
19:21 <pinheadmz> yeah
19:22 <jonatack> pinheadmz: "directory" node... just to recap, irc there are 3 basic types of tor nodes: bridge/gate, relays and exit; often a tor node has more than one of those roles
19:22 <urethane> pinheadmz "some kind of directory nodes to help route?" I think you're referring to what's called HSDirs in tor
19:22 <michaelfolkson> Won't it take a while to find a node that gives you Bitcoin peers? Connect to loads of Tor nodes that aren't interested in Bitcoin
19:23 <sipa> pinheadmz: "could there be a bitcoin core tor directory that served bootstapping nodes over tor?" -> that's called a seed node
19:23 <sipa> and it needs literally zero modifications to work :)
19:23 <pinheadmz> yep I realize i just circled back to what we already ahve
19:23 <vasild> contrib/seeds/nodes_main.txt
19:23 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: it will only connect to (supposed) bitcoin peers which will give you other bitcoin peers
19:24 <urethane> tor v2 doesn't have privacy for onion addresses from an HSDirs observer, tor v3 does have onion service privacy from HSDirs
19:24 <wumpus> torv3 definitely improved things in that regard
19:25 <urethane> for that reason alone, users should stop using v2 :)
19:25 <vasild> they will be forced to stop using v2 very soon
19:25 <vasild> in less than a year
19:26 <jonatack> snooping of HSDir relays is improved by v3? TIL
19:26 <michaelfolkson> Ok yeah. But you need to find (supposed) Bitcoin peers in the first place. Lots of trial and error pinging?
19:26 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: that's what the hardcoded peers are for, which are updated every major version
19:27 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: it will never ping random addresses to find bitcoin peers, never :)
19:27 <michaelfolkson> Ok thanks
19:27 <sipa> and the DNS seeds
19:27 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: if you have some good addnode peers in your conf file, maybe seednode too, it makes a big difference afaict
19:28 <wumpus> you could potentially do that in 32 bit IPv4, even thn it'd likely take a long time, but it would be pointless with 32 byte addresses
19:28 <emzy> hehe
19:28 <urethane> list_of_every_ip_address.txt
19:29 <jonatack> I'm not sure there's much point in going through the "how did you review" questions
19:30 <jonatack> I did like the tests vasild added
19:30 <michaelfolkson> And Sjors' test suggestions
19:31 <vasild> I added two more (not pushed yet), guided by code coverage (seeing which line is not covered and writing test for it)
19:31 <wumpus> I only tested (have two running Torv3 nodes now) and did very light review FWIW
19:31 <michaelfolkson> What do you use for code coverage? Marco's site?
19:31 <jonatack> indeed, I think some addrv1 unit tests could be added to have equivalent coverage
19:32 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: i think vasild uses his own tool for that... vasild?
19:32 <wumpus> your code works on ARM Linux and FreeBSD x86_64
19:32 <michaelfolkson> https://marcofalke.github.io/btc_cov/
19:32 <vasild> michaelfolkson: no, I run clang's tools and then a script to hilight which lines in the coverage report have been modified by the patch
19:33 <vasild> https://github.com/vasild/filter_coverage
19:33 <michaelfolkson> Cool, thanks
19:33 <vasild> if some of travis or cirus can publish build products that can be integrated in CI
19:33 <jonatack> Q: When should the new sendaddrv2 message type, aka "send me addrv2", be sent?
19:34 <vasild> I mean - if during build we create coverage.html that can be browsed later
19:34 <pinheadmz> I modified a plugin for sublime text for better side-by-side diff'ing: https://github.com/CJTozer/SublimeDiffView/pull/73
19:34 <brikk> i looked at adding a test for the padding=false case
19:34 <pinheadmz> makes it more like github side-by-side with the benefit of being able to scroll up and down past blobs of diff
19:35 <vasild> pinheadmz: and runs locally (I guess)! :)
19:35 <pinheadmz> yeah i always pull the branch
19:35 <jonatack> pinheadmz: i'm afraid you lost me with "more like GitHub"
19:35 <pinheadmz> mmm, in github "files changed" view, in side-by-side mode
19:36 <vasild> jonatack: that is a good question :)
19:36 <jonatack> vasild: which one, sendaddrv2 message?
19:36 <pinheadmz> thats how i like to review. but on github it only shows you the blbos that are different, i prefer to be able to scroll up and down the file (witihout clickthe expansion buttons)
19:36 <vasild> as early as possible :)
19:36 <vasild> yes, sendaddr
19:36 <vasild> v2
19:37 <jonatack> vasild: i thought troygiorshev wrote an interesting comment on that here https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/907/files#r476667308
19:37 <jonatack> saying "sendaddrv2 SHOULD be sent after receiving the verack message from the peer" wasn't quite precise enough
19:38 <vasild> but we can't send it early enough to get the addrfrom in v2 format :(
19:38 <michaelfolkson> Yeah good comment
19:39 <jonatack> vasild: hmmmmm
19:39 <vasild> addrfrom which is part of the version message
19:39 <wumpus> jonatack: don't know why it's not precise enough; you can't quote say "before any other messages" because other BIPs might also introduce these kind of upgrade messages
19:40 <sipa> vasild: i think addrfrom is effectively unused?
19:40 <michaelfolkson> But Troy's point I think is to be clear on whether that means immediately after or at any point in time after
19:40 <wumpus> it's unused and always send as 127.0.0.1
19:40 <wumpus> only addrto is used
19:40 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: as I understood it, it can be any time after
19:41 <vasild> sipa: hm, right, it is just read from the stream and then discarded, even better!
19:41 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: there are no defined phases after VERACK
19:41 <michaelfolkson> Yup. So Troy wanted the comment to make that clear (that's my reading of it anyway)
19:42 <sipa> oh, but addrMe is used
19:42 <sipa> that's annoying
19:42 <sipa> it'
19:42 <troygiorshev> michaelfolkson: yup that's it!
19:42 <sipa> it's used to classify our local addresses
19:42 <wumpus> yes, that one is used
19:43 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: right. i just sort of wonder, "should", as opposed to what
19:43 <sipa> so... should BIP155 define a replacement?
19:43 <troygiorshev> I'm more looking to clarify (or specify) that there are no phases after VERACK.
19:43 <wumpus> though many implementations just send it as 127.0.0.1 no matter what
19:44 <wumpus> sipa: I thought about it but really didn't want to change the version message
19:44 <sipa> wumpus: i mean, the sendaddrv2 message or whatever could contain "oh btw, the address i used to connect to you is X (in addrv2 serialization)"
19:44 <wumpus> (and I'm happy about that because even changing the network version was super controversial)
19:45 <sipa> and the addrMe field in version would become a dummy
19:45 <wumpus> sipa: that would be possible yes
19:47 <wumpus> it definitely couldn't hurt
19:47 <vasild> makes sense to me, that would need some adjustment to the BIP and the last commit in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19031/commits/a1b067e0 "net: advertise support for ADDRv2 via new message"
19:48 <vasild> there was some other proposal to add info to the sendaddrv2... what was it...
19:48 <wumpus> whether a node partakes in addr broadcasting at all
19:48 <sipa> heh the current BIP doesn't even include sendaddrv2?
19:48 <wumpus> gmaxwell's proposal
19:48 <vasild> right!
19:48 <wumpus> sipa: it's in vasild 's update PR
19:48 <jonatack> others: i think we are talking about PushNodeVersion() in net_processing.cpp
19:49 <wumpus> at some point we decided only the merge the updates to the BIP when the implementation was finalized
19:49 <vasild> sipa: that is in https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/907
19:49 <jonatack> BIP update PR: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/907
19:50 <vasild> and another one: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/967 :)
19:50 <wumpus> why are there more than one?
19:51 <jonatack> thanks, i had not seen PR 967
19:51 <wumpus> I mean, I think it's easier to have the proposed version of the BIP in one place
19:51 <sipa> you should ask luke-jr to merge those
19:51 <sipa> future changes can always be new PRs
19:51 <wumpus> well some other people claimed it would be better to merge only when things were sure/decided in the implementation
19:51 <sipa> i have been commenting on #907, not realizing it was a PR with a lot of changes in it already
19:52 <wumpus> don't have a strong opinion about it
19:52 <sipa> oh, ok
19:52 <vasild> 907 started being a moving target, invalidating ACKs all the time, so I decided to not update it with the stuff from 967, also 907 contains mods which have been agreed on. While 967 has got zero discussion so far. I did not want to add some controversal stuff to the settled 907
19:52 <wumpus> but yes, having multiple PRs is really confusing here
19:52 <sipa> well, there is a BIP - it's confusing if there are multiple places where the currently-discussed version is held
19:52 <sipa> it has a number already; ideally that number means just one thing
19:52 <sipa> (or at least, one thing at any given point in time)
19:53 <wumpus> but having a lot fo small merges to the BIP wouldn't be great either
19:53 <michaelfolkson> Why does it matter?
19:53 <wumpus> it clutters the BIP repostiory
19:53 <wumpus> it's not meant for incremental development
19:54 <wumpus> you can have have the in-progress BIP somewhere else
19:54 <urethane> increases the mental cost of review and discussion
19:54 <sipa> vasild: fwiw, whether a BIP change gets merged is solely up to the author(s) and editor
19:54 <sipa> you don't need acks from anyone
19:54 <michaelfolkson> Hmm I'd have thought it was inevitable in cases such as this. Changes invalidate previous ACKs etc
19:54 <jonatack> ISTM the BIP has different versions as well: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/9286b5254317d9e73fb25c5f0acd2b2d9937843e/bip-0155.mediawiki vs https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0155.mediawiki
19:54 <vasild> sipa: :-O
19:54 <jonatack> i've been reading the first one
19:55 <sipa> it's a proposal, you decide what the proposal is
19:55 <wumpus> it's nice to have ACKs from other people though
19:55 <sipa> wumpus: since you're the author, you should ack these changes ;)
19:55 <sipa> (or not)
19:56 <wumpus> I have (but not openly I guess)
19:56 <wumpus> I've always discussed with vasild about this
19:56 <sipa> of course
19:56 <michaelfolkson> Ok understood. So it is up to the author (vasild) to ask Luke to merge changes whenever vasild is happy with them
19:56 <sipa> michaelfolkson: wumpus, actually
19:56 <sipa> just saying - luke-jr's is probably just waiting for wumpus to ACK them
19:56 <vasild> I am the author of the PR, but not the BIP
19:56 <michaelfolkson> Ah yes sorry
19:57 <urethane> 3 minutes left :)
19:57 <wumpus> yes, I'll ACK them, np
19:58 <wumpus> as said, I had the impression that everything was in one PR, which tracked the new version of the BIP, which we'd merge when there was agreement on the implementation
19:58 <michaelfolkson> Did we cover all of Jon's questions?
19:58 <jonatack> PRs which also pick up work by dongcarl as well, and sipa for the crypto... it's a team effort
19:58 <wumpus> exactly because all kind of things come up during this
19:58 <vasild> sendaddrv2(your address is X, I promise to participate to gossip (but I may lie to you))
19:58 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: no, but the discussion was worth it
19:58 <michaelfolkson> Haha we did BAD
19:59 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: the variable-length question was a bit of a trick question
19:59 <jonatack> to check understanding
19:59 <jonatack> The addresses defined in BIP155 are of fixed size.
19:59 <jonatack> We don't actually handle any "variable-length" ones, just addresses of varying fixed lengths.
19:59 <jonatack> Why was the boolean pad parameter added to EncodeBase32()?
20:00 <jonatack> this seemed interesting
20:00 <jonatack> neither vasild nor i know
20:00 <jonatack> According to vasild: "that was ugly :/ but needed as some === signs appeared at the end of i2p addresses"
20:00 <brikk> thats how i see it too
20:00 <michaelfolkson> Hmm
20:00 <sipa> i probably implemented some standard base32 format, which includes the requirement to pad with = symbols
20:00 <brikk> but will there be side effects ?
20:00 <jonatack> for now, it's important to have the code recognize i2p addresses with the correct length and gossip them
20:00 <sipa> and I2P uses a slightly different standard that omits the padding
20:00 <jonatack> so that when we add full i2p support, assuming it happens later on,
20:00 <jonatack> then previous releases (beginning with the next one containing this code) can gossip i2p addresses
20:01 <brikk> i looked into a test for it to make sure it behaves, because there was none that I could find
20:01 <vasild> I guess the decode must be prepare to see non-multiple-of-8 input and pad it itself with = before decoding (once we start parsing i2p addresses)
20:01 <jonatack> brikk: great
20:01 <wumpus> to be clear, I2P support is not a goal for the initial PR
20:02 <jonatack> right, for later on
20:02 <jonatack> BHow do you think Bitcoin Core should make the transition from Tor v2 to v3? All at once, or v3 first opt-in, then default (and v2 opt-in or deprecated)?
20:02 <sipa> i don't think we should relay I2P addresses before there is support
20:02 <wumpus> we'd like torv3 support as soon as possible, I2P would be nice but can be done later if the gorundwork is done
20:02 <brikk> so is the pr doing a bit too much at this point?
20:02 <jonatack> Should we just bump to v3, or go thru first v3 opt-in, v2 default...
20:02 <wumpus> jonatack: first both, imo
20:03 <michaelfolkson> jonatack: So definitely not all at once. I'd say opt-in and then default
20:03 <sipa> brikk: the BIP defines I2P, so it makes sense to include the BIP-defined checks for it
20:03 <wumpus> jonatack: opt in is not necessary imo
20:03 <michaelfolkson> Oh
20:03 <sipa> that doesn't mean Bitcoin Core needs to relay them
20:03 <brikk> sipa: i see
20:03 <jonatack> #endmeeting
20:03 <wumpus> jonatack: there should be no reason why you'd not want v3 but want v2, but I can see a reason for keeping the v2 open for now, for older nodes
20:03 <urethane> I don't see the motivation to make it opt-in
20:03 <wumpus> sipa: right
20:04 <jonatack> wumpus: right
20:04 <vasild> https://bitnodes.io/nodes/ -- 22% run the latest version
20:04 <michaelfolkson> So v2 would be deprecated at some point but a long time in future? Or never deprecated?
20:04 <@jnewbery> thanks jonatack! Great meeting. I didn't say much, but I found the discussion really interesting :)
20:04 <jonatack> we have 4 weeks to FF
20:04 <jonatack> thanks jnewbery!
20:04 <michaelfolkson> Thanks jonatack!
20:04 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: after Tor removes it from their codebase, we should too, I think
20:04 <vasild> michaelfolkson: tor itself will drop v2 in about a year https://blog.torproject.org/v2-deprecation-timeline
20:04 <troygiorshev> thanks jonatack!
20:05 <wumpus> thanks jonatack
20:05 <michaelfolkson> But people could be running old version of Tor?
20:05 <jonatack> please review the PR everyone :)
20:05 <emzy> Thanks jonatack!
20:05 <michaelfolkson> (even when Tor removes it)
20:05 <wumpus> michaelfolkson: uhm, Tor versions that don't support v3 are ancient by now, and actively dangerous to run
20:05 <michaelfolkson> Ok makes sense
20:05 <wumpus> they've supported it for a long time
20:06 <vasild> michaelfolkson: hmm, given that tor relays through some random tor nodes, I don't know what will happen if you run an old tor node that insists on doing v2 stuff and newer ones have dropped support for it
20:06 <sipa> torv3 is supported as of 0.3.2.9, released in january 2018
20:06 <sipa> that's not _that_ long ago
20:07 <wumpus> for Tor that's really long ago
20:07 <sipa> i guess :)
20:07 <wumpus> a lot happens there
20:07 <wumpus> it's not unlike Bitcoin in that regard
20:07 <urethane> tor v2 depreciation time line https://blog.torproject.org/v2-deprecation-timeline
20:07 <vasild> I guess it may likely be impossible to reach torv2 services after https://blog.torproject.org/v2-deprecation-timeline
20:07 <jonatack> s/it's important to have the code recognize i2p addresses with the correct length and gossip them/just recognize them/
20:07 <sipa> vasild: i think so
20:08 <urethane> July 15th, 2021 0.4.6.x: Tor will no longer support v2 and support will be removed from the code base.
20:08 <urethane> October 15th, 2021 We will release new Tor client stable versions for all supported series that will disable v2.
20:08 <wumpus> in any case if you're still running those Tor versions by the time addrv2 is removed (and I suppose, the directories and such shut down), they won't be able to use hidden services at all I think
20:09 <sipa> i think the bigger question is when directory services etc will stop supporting v2
20:09 <vasild> sipa: my take on "gossip i2p in 0.21 is that, because only 22% run latest version, when we add i2p supprt in e.g. 0.22 then old nodes (0.21) will also gossip it
20:09 <wumpus> but I don't think bitcoind needs to support pre-addrv3 Tor
20:10 <sipa> vasild: i'm not sure that's a good idea, as nothing in the network can determine the existance of such addresses...
20:10 <vasild> sipa: worried about junk traffic?
20:10 <sipa> so little ways of purging garbage i2p someone may start rumouring
20:10 <sipa> more worried about garbage in addrmans
20:10 <vasild> hmm
20:11 <sipa> i'd say first start gossipping it only between i2p peers, which actually have i2p connectivity
20:11 <vasild> same with torv2/torv3 addresses for a node that has no tor connectivity. Or IPv6 addresses for a node that has only IPv4 connectivity...
20:12 <sipa> once there is a tangible network, anything can start gossipping it, as it's useful to prevent partitions
20:12 <sipa> if there was a concrete plan to have i2p proxy support in the near future, maybe that could be different
20:14 <wumpus> i'd say first start gossipping it only  between i2p peers, which actually have i2p connectivity <- agree
20:14 <jonatack> seems sensible
20:15 <sipa> for torv3 i think we expect a torv3-reachable set of bitcoind nodes to appear almost immediately
20:15 <wumpus> you could say so :)
20:16 <vasild> currently we gossip addresses from unreachable networks to just 1 peer (and addresses from reachable networks to 2 peers)
20:16 <sipa> vasild: 1.5!
20:16 <vasild> did it get merged?
20:16 <sipa> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19728 yup
20:17 <vasild> yes, https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19728
20:17 <sipa> so i think that for "not known to exist" networks that number should probably be even lower, or 0
20:17 <vasild> so you propose to extend that logic to reachable: 2, unreachable-non-i2p 1.5, unreachable-i2p: 0
20:18 <sipa> same with cjdns
20:18 <vasild> unreachable-ipv4-ipv6-tor: 1.5
20:19 <vasild> reachable: 2, unreachable-ipv4-ipv6-torv2-torv3: 1.5, unreachable-anything-else: 0
20:22 <vasild> sipa: "more worried about garbage in addrmans" currently for a node to be able to protect itself from this it must have connectivity to all 3: ip4, ip6 and tor, right?
20:24 <sipa> assuming some reasonable number of honest nodes, it's not that black and white
20:24 <sipa> as ipv6-capable nodes will learn about useless ipv6 addresses being rumoured, and prune them
20:25 <sipa> hmm, maybe this isn't that big of a concern
20:25 <sipa> it just feels strange to me to permit addrman space to be taken up by addresses in a network we know doesn't ezist
20:26 <vasild> I will sleep over with this, maybe limit size in addrman also based on reachable/unreachable
20:36 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: thank you for adding to the bitcoinstackexchange answer! just saw that you mentioned it above
20:36 <sipa> he's been adding many :)
20:36 <urethane> +1
{% endirc %}
