---
layout: pr
date: 2020-09-09
title: "Bip-325: Signet [consensus]"
pr: 18267
authors: [kallewoof]
components: ["consensus", "validation"]
host: pinheadmz
status: upcoming
commit:
---

This pull request implements the portion of
[BIP325](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0325.mediawiki)
responsible for connecting to a signet network and validating blocks (it does
not implement the code required by miners to sign signet blocks). We are
touching consensus-critical code today! Let's make sure we do it right :-)


## Notes

- kallewoof has an (outdated)
[gist](https://gist.github.com/kallewoof/98b6d8dbe126d2b6f47da0ddccd2aa5a)
describing how to connect to signet once the client is built. If you can run the
branch and generate a signet address, you can request a payout from his
[faucet](https://signet.bc-2.jp/)

- At the start of this meeting I'll ask everyone for their signet address and
reward participants who answer questions correctly or ask their own good questions!

## Questions

1. Why do we need test networks and what problems (if any) do we have with the current testnet?

2. What are some of the parameters that distinguish mainnet, testnet and signet?
Which of these do the different networks have in common? What makes signet special?

3. How many signets are there? Could we start our own just for review club, and how?

4. What parts of this PR affect consensus-critical code for nodes running on mainnet?

5. What new configuration options have been added?

6. What are `CMutableTransaction tx_to_spend` and `CMutableTransaction tx_spending`?
Who broadcasts these transactions?

7. Why was `GetWitnessCommitmentIndex()` moved? Was anything altered?

8. (bonus) Did you build the GUI? How does it look different from mainnet?

9. (double bonus) [Why is the signet commitment concatenated to the witness commitment
and not in its own `OP_RETURN`?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/947/files#r463053062)

<!-- TODO: After meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags
## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
{% endirc %}
-->
