---
layout: pr
date: 2020-06-24
title: "Span improvements"
pr: 18468
authors: [sipa]
components: ["refactoring"]
host: sipa
status: past
commit: 26acc8dd
---

**Note:** The PR being discussed ([#18468: Span Improvements](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18468))
originally included commit [`Support conversion between Spans of compatible types `](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18591/commits/0fbde488b24f62b4bbbde216647941dcac65c81a)
that was merged as part of [#18591: Add C++17 build to Travis](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18591). We will be discussing
the changes in that commit as well, as they functionally belong together.

## Notes

- Today's PR is the recently-merged [#18468: Span Improvements](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18468).
  It brings our `Span` type closer to the functionality of C++20's proposed [`std::span`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span), and
  then demonstrates some of its uses by simplifying code that uses it in various places.

- A `Span` can be thought of as a pair of a pointer to some data type together with a length,
  identifying a range of contiguous elements in memory. In many ways it acts like a vector,
  but it doesn't own any data --- which means no copying of the actual data is involved. It is
  an extremely lightweight object, but it does come with a cost: higher-level code is responsible
  for guaranteeing that the pointed-to data is still available.

- `std::span` is a new data type that will likely be part of the upcoming C++20 standard
  (see the cppreference.com page on [std::span](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span)).
  While Bitcoin Core won't switch to that standard any time soon (we're currently on C++11, and will
  be transitioning to C++17 over the next 2 releases), it is a remarkably useful and simple
  abstraction, which is why we have our own backported version that is C++11 compatible.
  `Span` isn't quite as powerful as `std::span`, but today's PR brings it a lot closer.

- The gist of the changes is introducing implicit construction of `Span` objects from range-like
  objects ([arrays](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/array),
  [`std::array`s](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/array),
  [`std::vector`s](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector),
  [`prevector`s](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3d776b59380ad31e8b3a2948364c7690eebe05d/src/prevector.h),
  [`std::string`s](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/basic_string), ...), and
  automatic conversion between `Span` of compatible member types. Implicit construction and
  conversion is a powerful but dangerous C++ feature that should be used cautiously. Most of
  the complexity in the code changes is in making sure these operations cannot be used in
  dangerous or unexpected ways.

- Several other PRs have been merged and proposed that make use of `Span`. Looking over those
  may give an intuition for why this data type is so useful:
  - [#12886: Introduce Span type and use it instead of FLATDATA](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12886)
  - [#13062: Make script interpreter independent from storage type CScript](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/13062)
  - [#13697: Support output descriptors in scantxoutset](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/13697)
  - [#18388: Make VerifyWitnessProgram use a Span stack](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18388)
  - [#19320: wallet: Replace CDataStream& with Span\<char\> where possible](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19320)
  - [#19326: Simplify hash.h interface using Spans](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19326)

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
   (You're always encouraged to put your PR review on GitHub, even after it has been merged)

2. Do you think `Span` is a useful abstraction? Can you think of more places where it could
   be used to simplify existing code?

3. When reviewing the PR, did you compare with the proposed
   [std::span](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span) interface? What differences
   did you notice?

4. What condition is imposed on converting `Span<T1>` into a `Span<T2>`? Why is it useful to
   permit such conversion, and what are the risks in doing so unconditionally?

5. Why is `MakeSpan` useful? Can't it be replaced with just invoking the `Span::Span`
   constructor?

6. What are some other examples of features from future C++ versions that have been backported
   as utility features in the Bitcoin Core codebase?

## Meeting Log
{% irc %}
13:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
13:00 < fjahr> hi
13:00 < felixweis> hi
13:00 < willcl_ark> hi
13:00 < gimballock> hi
13:00 < jnewbery> welcome to review club everyone! Feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here.
13:00 < hashbasher> 'ello
13:00 < jnewbery> (or just lurk. lurkers welcome here too)
13:00 < emzy> hi
13:00 < michaelfolkson> hi
13:01 < jnewbery> Today we're looking at PR 18468 (Span improvements), although I expect the discussion might touch on other aspects of Spans that aren't specifically in that PR.
13:01 < jnewbery> Notes and questions are in the usual place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/18468.html
13:01 < jkczyz> hi
13:01 < jnewbery> sipa has very kindly offered to host today. He also contributed all of our Span implementation in Bitcoin Core, so he should be able to answer at least some of our questions :)
13:01 < jnewbery> Over to you, sipa
13:01 < raj_> hi
13:01 < sipa> hi
13:02 < sipa> so, today is a bit of an unusual review club, as there is very little bitcoin-specific knowledge involved
13:02 < troygiorshev> hi
13:02 < nehan_> hi
13:02 < sipa> but that's well compensated by needing some nitty gritty details of C++ templates instead...
13:02 < sipa> so, who has had a chance to review the PR?
13:03 < raj_> y
13:03 < fjahr> y
13:03 < troygiorshev> n
13:03 < nehan_> n
13:03 < willcl_ark> y
13:03 < jkczyz> n - mostly lurking today but find the topic interesting
13:03 < emzy> y/n
13:03 < jnewbery> y
13:03 < felixweis> n still looking at the history of span
13:04 < sipa> perhaps some additional last-minute reference material: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19367
13:04 < sipa> inspired by things pointed out in the PR, as well as explaining some of its uses
13:05 < sipa> so the first real question: Do you think Span is a useful abstraction? Can you think of more places where it could be used to simplify existing code?
13:05 < amiti> I found 19367 very helpful. thanks for adding!
13:05 < fjahr> Definitely useful but I couldn't come up with good places to use it yet. Anything where we read a lot of data from disk I suspect.
13:06 < jnewbery> +1 19367 is very helpful
13:06 < nehan_> I'd like to understand when a span is better than a pointer or reference to the original datastructure
13:06 < michaelfolkson> Can we quickly first just confirm the motivation for Span? We are concerned with buffer overflows right? And including a size with a pointer ensures these don't occur?
13:06 < willcl_ark> I couldn't tell if Span was improving program performance, or just providing a friendlier interface for the programmer
13:07 < raj_> I am still tumbling over the usefulness part. Can someone explain how is it better than other collection types?
13:07 < jnewbery> willcl_ark: I had the same question. Is the motivation code clarity/safety or performance
13:07 < sipa> raj_: that one is easy to answer: a Span is not a collection!
13:07 < sipa> raj_: it is a reference to a range of elements, but it's cheap to copy/modify/pass around
13:08 < sipa> in a way, it's an alternative (in some cases) to always passing around a pointer/length pair, or a begin iterator/end iterator pair
13:08 < sipa> so when compared to that, i'd say it's a better interface, that's more readable and less prone to errors
13:08 < sipa> but as it's literally just encapsulating a pointer and a length, there is no performance difference to doing that instead
13:09 < jnewbery> right, it doesn't own the data, so it's up to the programmer to not shoot themself in the foot by doing something like using after free
13:09 < willcl_ark> ok, thanks
13:09 < nehan_> sipa: when is it important to have the length/end iterator?
13:09 < andrewtoth> so it is similar to a tuple in other languages?
13:09 < sipa> andrewtoth: no
13:09 < sipa> that'd be std::tuple
13:09 < nehan_> it reminds me a little of a slice in go
13:09 < andrewtoth> ahh thanks
13:09 < sipa> nehan_: i believe it is similar to that
13:10 < sipa> i've seen C++ codebases that had their own span like type named Slice
13:10 < nehan_> however it's super scary because updates to the original object might invalidate the span
13:10 < sipa> as a motivation, let me link to this: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19326
13:10 < jnewbery> it could also be called a view
13:11 < sipa> just scrolling through it, you can see dozens of places where we compute a begin and end iterator, and pass both into a function that hashes
13:11 < jnewbery> (in fact, I think the original c++ proposal was called array_view)
13:11 < raj_> +1 jnewbery view seems like a better name to express its nature. specially the scarry parts.
13:12 < sipa> there is a "const char" specific span like object too introduced in c++17, called string_view
13:12 < sipa> which is very similar, but has some string-like operations on it defined for convenience
13:13 < emzy> jnewbery: array_view builds a better image im my mind as slice or sapn. tnx.
13:13 < sipa> michaelfolkson: i wouldn't say that preventing buffer overdlows is the primary motivation... indirectly i expect that more readable code for working with ranges of objects reduces the chance of that, but i'd say readability is the goal
13:14 < willcl_ark> seems also (a little bit!) like a Python memoryview in that case, although not only for streams
13:14 < sipa> fjahr: unsure what disk access has to do with it, as spans always refer to ranges of elements *in memory*
13:15 < hashbasher> +1 nehan's question, when's it important to know the lenght/end iterator?
13:16 < emzy> span is very generic, for every object type?
13:16 < sipa> emzy: indeed
13:16 < michaelfolkson> sipa: Thanks. So is this use case of making the script interpreter independent from CScript possible without Span? Span just makes it easier due to more readable code?
13:16 < sipa> michaelfolkson: exactly
13:16 < michaelfolkson> Cool
13:16 < sipa> for example look at https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1525L1558
13:17 < sipa> the script interpreter for witness scripts, it has to deal with a range of elements that are the actual stack, and then a final one that is the script
13:17 < willcl_ark> It certainly seems handy for the experienced programmer, but also seems to introduce some "hidden" pitfalls (which are described in #19367) that you might be more inclined to consider with a pointer/length pair.
13:17 < sipa> instead of code that does iterator arithmetic to keep track of everything
13:18 < willcl_ark> Does it improve performance at all avoiding computing begin/end iterators?
13:18 < fjahr> sipa: I was just thinking of at which points we might want to handle data efficiently and I thought  it might be connect with data that gets saved to disk sometimes. But yes, it does not directly make the case to use a span.
13:18 < sipa> you build a span of all the elements, and then extract subspans
13:18 < sipa> hashbasher: say you have an array of 20 bytes, and want to hash them
13:18 < jnewbery> ok, here's an attempt at motivation. sipa, let me know if this is off:
13:19 < sipa> the typical way would be to call a hash function, which you pass a pointer to the beginning of the array, plus the length
13:19 < jnewbery> Often, we'll have data stored in continguous range-like contains (arrays, vactors, ...). There are functions that we want to call with that data, but those functions don't want to care about the specifics of the container, so currently they take a pointer and a size, which the caller needs to fish out of the container.
13:19 < jnewbery> With a Span, and implicit conversion from those containers to Span, the function can just take a Span, the caller can pass any of those range-like containers, and the conversion will take care of it for you.
13:19 < sipa> jnewbery: yeah, good to bring that up - it's a great use case but not the only one
13:19 < sipa> it's a way of writing functions that operate generically on whatever type of container your data is stored in
13:20 < sipa> and an anti-pattern that sometimes emerges is "oh, let's make the function only accept a vector, and if someone has it in some other form, they can construct a vector with a copy of the data" - which is obviously wasteful
13:21 < jnewbery> wasteful and wouldn't work if you wanted to do something non-const with the data
13:21 < sipa> with a span you'd write the function once, and it'll work when called with a vector, or an array, or an std::array, or a prevector, or a uint256, or a CPubKey (the latter two also being types that act as ranges bytes!)
13:22 < willcl_ark> OK that's definitely useful
13:22 < hashbasher> +1 makes much more sense to me now
13:22 < nehan_> sipa: why span instead of generics?
13:23 < sipa> nehan_: by generics you mean templates?
13:23 < nehan_> yes
13:23 < sipa> good question
13:23 < sipa> one is that it forces instantiation at compile time for every type you invoke it with
13:24 < sipa> which may be worth it, but in many cases it's also not: if literally all your function needs is a range, there is no reason to instantiate it for vector and prevector and array and ...
13:24 < sipa> another is that spans support range-like operations, like subspans
13:24 < sipa> which is e.g. heavily relied on in the descriptor parsing code
13:25 < sipa> which passes down smaller and smaller spans to the string to be parsed, as it gets dissected
13:25 < jnewbery> the downside of instatiating for all types is marginally longer compile times and marginally larger binary size? Anything else?
13:26 < sipa> you couldn't do that with templated functions - you'd still need to create copies any time you want to pass down a substring
13:26 < sipa> jnewbery: yeah
13:26 < sipa> also forcing everything to be in headers
13:26 < jnewbery> ah yes
13:26 < MarcoFalke> sipa: You could (in theory) put all template instantiations in the cpp file
13:26 < MarcoFalke> But that requires knowing them upfront
13:26 < sipa> MarcoFalke: yes, yuck :)
13:27 < sipa> and as said, that doesn't cover all use cases
13:28 < sipa> so perhaps it's reasonable to state it as: a more lightweight alternative to making functions templated over various input types, in case all they need is a range of elements... while simultaneously also supporting passing down sub-ranges
13:28 < sipa> perhaps it's time for the next question?
13:28 < sipa> When reviewing the PR, did you compare with the proposed std::span interface? What differences did you notice?
13:29 < sipa> https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span for reference
13:29 < jnewbery> ashamed to say that I did not, even though that question was a pretty strong hint I probably should have
13:29 < raj_> It doesn't have rbegin, rend and empty.
13:29 < fjahr> Extent/size is not a template parameter and we don't have rbegin or rend
13:29 < sipa> very good
13:29  * sipa fishes for more
13:30 < willcl_ark> based on some of the PR comments, it seems like Bitcoin::Span is a subset of std::span
13:30 < sipa> indeed
13:30 < sipa> let's have a look at the constructors
13:30 < sipa> https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/span/span
13:30 < sipa> in particular the first 2
13:32 < sipa> they take iterators as arguments
13:32 < jnewbery> we don't have a ctor from an iterator?
13:32 < sipa> indeed
13:32 < sipa> any guess why not?
13:32 < jnewbery> Because it's hard to implement without std::address_of 
13:32 < sipa> as wumpus just discovered in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19373 it'd be pretty useful to have iterator-based constructors
13:33 < jnewbery> according to a code comment I read somewhere :)
13:33 < sipa> what would be the problem with just doing template<typename It> Span(It begin, It end) { return Span<...>(&*begin, &*end); }
13:34 < instagibbs> guess: you're de-reffing out of bounds memory location in &*end?
13:34 < sipa> instagibbs: bingo
13:34 < sipa> end is likely an iterator to the end of an object, which may not be dereferencable
13:35 < sipa> std::address_of is added in C++20 that lets you get a pointer to the element an iterator refers to, which deferencing it
13:35 < MarcoFalke> Then, why wouldn't Span<...>(&*begin, end-begin) work ( assuming  operator& is not overriden)?
13:35 < sipa> MarcoFalke: what if begin is not dereferencable?
13:36 < MarcoFalke> hm :)
13:37 < sipa> you can start special casing the situation where begin==end, and then return a Span(nullptr, 0), and otherwise return Span(&*begin, end-begin)
13:37 < sipa> but that leads to more pitfalls, as the span.data() that comes out would be wrong
13:38 < sipa> anyone have more comments around this? or anything else we've been discussing?
13:38 < willcl_ark> so the difficult case here is an empty array/vector?
13:39 < sipa> willcl_ark: or a span at the end of one (e.g. if you have a vector<int> vec{1,2,3}, then span(vec.end(), vec.end()) is expected to be legal
13:39 < willcl_ark> ah ok
13:39 < raj_> why we are not doing rbegin and rend? or empty by checking if size=0?
13:40 < michaelfolkson> I'm assuming if/when Core updates to C++ 20 these differences won't pose a problem? It will just be unusued functionality?
13:40 < sipa> raj_: why not rbegin/rend? simply because we haven't encountered a use
13:40 < troygiorshev> When would begin not be dereferenceable?  naively that doesn't sound like a very useful iterator
13:40 < sipa> troygiorshev: just gave an example Span<...>(vec.end(), vec.end()) is expected to be legal
13:40 < sipa> and begin here is the vector's end
13:41 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: I'd presume when (and if) we upgrade to C++10, then span.h will get deleted and replaced by std::span
13:41 < troygiorshev> sipa: ah thx
13:41 < MarcoFalke> *C++20
13:41 < hashbasher> sipa: can you list a few functional areas of bitcoin core that this change benefits?
13:41 < sipa> michaelfolkson, MarcoFalke: exactly
13:41 < michaelfolkson> MarcoFalke: And it would just slot in easily right?
13:41 < sipa> hashbasher: i've given a list of PRs that make use of Span in the notes
13:41 < sipa> hashbasher: probably best to look at those
13:42 < MarcoFalke> michaelfolkson: jup, because Span claims to be a subset of std::span
13:42 < hashbasher> oh ok, i saw that, didn't go through them
13:42 < sipa> michaelfolkson: yes, it should pretty much be a drop in replacement
13:42 < sipa> ok, next question
13:42 < sipa> What condition is imposed on converting Span<T1> into a Span<T2>? Why is it useful to permit such conversion, and what are the risks in doing so unconditionally?
13:42 < sipa> this is probably the most advanced C++ question in the series
13:43 < sipa> but feel free to guess
13:43 < jnewbery> std::is_convertible<T (*)[], C (*)[]
13:43 < raj_> if the underlying types are convertible then we do it?
13:43 < sipa> which means?
13:43 < fjahr> if implicit conversion between the types is possible we can convert, not sure exactly what can go wrong
13:43 < jnewbery> can you implicitly convert from a pointer to an array of type T to a pointer to an array of type C
13:43 < sipa> not exactly
13:43 < sipa> indeed!
13:44 < sipa> from *an array* of T to *an array* of C
13:44 < sipa> why does this matter? why not just permitting it when a pointer to T can be converted to a pointer to C?
13:44 < jnewbery> important because that implicit conversion means that the objects are of the same size and so pointer arithmetic works as you'd expect
13:44 < sipa> exactly
13:44 < sipa> if you have a parent class A, and a child class B
13:45 < sipa> then pointers to B can be converted to pointers to A
13:45 < sipa> but A and B may not have the same size, so after converting, pointer arithmetic may end up in the middle of B's elements
13:46 < sipa> but why do we want such conversion in the first place?
13:46 < jnewbery> I spent a long time scratching my head over the template definitions of the constructors before seeing the comment a few lines below about "pointers to arrays" https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/205b87d2f6bd01285de50ba742e32e4ab1298b13/src/span.h#L53-L57
13:46 < MarcoFalke> So array conversion implies implicit conversion?
13:46 < sipa> MarcoFalke: yeah, this matches the criterion in std::span, which makes me confident there aren't edge cases left
13:47 < sipa> if it's possible to treat an array of T as an array of C (e.g. if you have an array of ints, you can treat it as an array of const ints), then converting a Span of C to a Span of T is also possible
13:47 < willcl_ark> well the code comment-given example of converting to const seems reasonable, but I'm not sure about converting to another child class
13:48 < sipa> willcl_ark: less useful, but i believe it also permits adding a volatile qualifier
13:49 < jnewbery> The commit log confused me: "This prevents constructing a Span<A> given two pointers into an array of B (where B is a subclass of A), at least without explicit cast to pointers to A." I think it is possible to construct Span<A> (as long as those pointers to arrays are implicitly convertible)
13:49 < sipa> so if you have an array "B arr[5];"
13:50 < sipa> then Span<A>(arr, arr+5) should not work
13:50 < jnewbery> or is it literally just conversions between cv-qualifiers?
13:50 < sipa> because if you have a function that accepts an array of A, you can't pass it an array of B
13:50 < sipa> jnewbery: i haven't come across other useful examples, to be honest
13:51 < MarcoFalke> Would "A arr[5]; Span<B>(arr, arr+5);" compile?
13:51 < sipa> MarcoFalke: no
13:51 < sipa> but B arr[5]; Span<A>((A*)arr, (A*)(arr+5)) will
13:51 < jnewbery> ah. "Given two pointers into an array". I think I get it now
13:52 < sipa> if you do the pointer casting yourself you bypass the protection (and get garbage)
13:52 < MarcoFalke> oh. I guess it might be useful when we want to (e.g.) pass  a span of validation interfaces
13:52 < sipa> this is an interesting question, why std::span uses 'convertible array' as criterion instead of 'add cv qualifiers'. i don't know the answer
13:53 < sipa> MarcoFalke: i'm not sure that'd work
13:53 < MarcoFalke> Span<CValidationInterface>{(CValidationInterface*) wallet_array, (CValidationInterface*) (wallet_array+5)};
13:53 < fjahr> sorry, was the answer to the risks that the elements could have a different size or was there something else? i think i misunderstood the question that there was something else
13:53 < sipa> fjahr: indeed
13:53 < fjahr> tyt
13:53 < fjahr> ty
13:54 < sipa> Why is MakeSpan useful? Can’t it be replaced with just invoking the Span::Span constructor?
13:55 < sipa> (and as we're running out of time, a hint: why does C++20 not have an equivalent std::make_span)
13:55 < sipa> i guess that's more an extra question than a hint, ignore me!
13:56 < petterhs> 0,
13:56 < michaelfolkson> It constructs a Span of the right type automatically
13:56 < sipa> yep
13:56 < MarcoFalke> but why can't the constructor do that?
13:56 < willcl_ark> does ::Span not do that?
13:57 < sipa> not in C++11
13:57 < michaelfolkson> No idea why not in C++20. It isn't, I checked
13:57 < sipa> you cannot construct a data type without specifying its template parameters
13:57 < sipa> if you try Span(std::vector<int>{1,2,3}) it will complain about missing template
13:58 < sipa> however, since C++17, there exists something called deduction guides
13:58 < sipa> which are rules that a type can specify to figure out the template argument based on a constructor's arguments
13:59 < jnewbery> https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/class_template_argument_deduction
13:59 < sipa> so std::span, which is in C++20, uses those to avoid the need for a make_span
13:59 < sipa> and there you can just replace all uses of MakeSpan with calling the constructor directly
13:59 < sipa> without specifying the template argument
13:59 < sipa> jnewbery: indeed
13:59 < MarcoFalke> so on master the verbose version Span<int>(std::vector<int>{1,2,3}) would compile?
13:59 < sipa> MarcoFalke: indeed
14:00 < sipa> MakeSpan is just convenience to avoid needing to specify the <int>
14:00 < sipa> ok, any very last minute comments/insights/questions?
14:00 < willcl_ark> so it will make the scripted diff when we use std::span smaller :)
14:01 < sipa> yeah
14:01 < jnewbery> that was really informative. I learned a lot
14:01 < sipa> nothing?
14:01 < sipa> ok!
14:02 < sipa> thank you all for attending
14:02 < jnewbery> Thanks for hosting, sipa!
14:02 < fjahr> sipa: thanks!
14:02 < troygiorshev> thx sipa!
14:02 < raj_> thanks sipa. Lot to digest..
14:02 < felixweis> thanks sipa!
14:02 < andrewtoth> thanks sipa!
14:02 < michaelfolkson> Yeah thanks sipa, that was great
14:02 < emzy> Thanks sipa!
14:02 < MarcoFalke> thx. TIL about CTAD
14:02 < gimballock> (y)  thanks
14:03 < willcl_ark> thanks Sipa!
14:03 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
14:03 < instagibbs> thanks sipa!
{% endirc %}
