---
layout: pr
date: 2020-03-18
title: "Coins: Don't allow a coin to be spent and FRESH. Improve commenting."
pr: 18113
authors: [jnewbery]
components: ["utxo db and indexes"]
host: jnewbery
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

- The coins database is the structure in Bitcoin Core which keeps track of the
  UTXO set. We looked at the coins database in a [previous PR Review Club
  (#17487)](./17487). The notes for that Review Club meeting include an
  excellent description of the caching for the coins database.

- The coins database is a key-value store. It was introduced in v0.8 ([PR
  1677 - Ultraprune](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/1677)) where it was keyed by
  transaction. Pieter Wuille describes this change in a [recent Chaincode Podcast
  episode](https://podcast.chaincode.com/2020/01/27/pieter-wuille-1.html).

- In v0.15 the coins database was changed to be keyed by transaction _output_
  ([PR 10195](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10195)). For more
  information on that change see [this blog
  post](https://johnnewbery.com/post/whats-new-in-bitcoin-core-v0.15-pt1/).

- The 'prune' in ultraprune came from the fact that once all of the outputs
  from a transaction had been spent, that entry could be removed or 'pruned'
  from the coins database (note that this is a different concept from
  a pruned node, which deletes old block files that it no longer needs).  The
  'pruned' terminology for the coins database no longer makes sense - either a
  coin is unspent (and exists in the database) or is spent (and removed from the
  database).

- When the coins database was changed from per-transaction to per-txout,
  some of the 'pruned' code comments and variable names were left in. This PR
  was motivated by improving the clarity of those comments. Subsequently some
  additional small changes were added.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK?](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)
   (Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub.)

2. This PR touches consensus-critical code. Does it meet the high bar
   for justifying a change to such critical code? Is improving
   code clarity justification enough?

3. What does it mean for a coin to be `FRESH`? What about `DIRTY`?

4. Coins in a coins cache can be:
     - spent or unspent,
     - `FRESH` or not `FRESH`, and
     - `DIRTY` or not `DIRTY`
   How many total states are there? How many of those are valid? Does this PR
   change that?

5. Could this change have a performance impact during block validation
   or Initial Block Download?

<!-- TODO: uncomment and add meeting log
## Meeting Log
```
```
--->
