---
layout: pr
date: 2020-02-05
title: "Use wtxid for transaction relay"
pr: 18044
authors: [sdaftuar]
components: ["mempool", "p2p"]
host: jonatack
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

### Context

- This PR builds on [PR #17951](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17951)
  "Use rolling bloom filter of recent block txs for AlreadyHave() check" by the
    same author, which was just merged.

### What is a `wtxid`?
- [BIP
  141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#specification)
  (Segregated Witness) introduced the definition of `wtxid`:
    - "A new wtxid is defined: the double SHA256 of the new serialization with
      witness data."
    - "If all txins (transaction inputs) are not witness program, a transaction's
      wtxid is equal to its txid."
- [PR #11203](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11203) added `wtxid` to
  the mempool entry output of `entryToJSON()` in src/rpc/blockchain.cpp,
  thereby exposing wtxids to callers in the output of RPCs `getmempoolentry`,
  `getmempooldescendants`, `getmempoolancestors`, and `getrawmempool`.

### PR description "Use wtxid for transaction relay"

"Using txids (a transaction's hash, without witness) for transaction relay is
problematic, post-segwit -- if a peer gives us a segwit transaction that fails
policy checks, it could be because the txid associated with the transaction is
definitely unacceptable to our node (regardless of the witness), or it could be
that the transaction was malleated and with a different witness, the txid could
be accepted to our mempool.

"We have a bloom filter of recently rejected transactions, whose purpose is to
help us avoid redownloading and revalidating transactions that fail to be
accepted, but because of this potential for witness malleability to interfere
with relay of valid transactions, we do not use the filter for segwit
transactions. This issue is discussed at some length in
[#8279](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/8279). The effect of this is
that whenever a segwit transaction that fails policy checks is relayed, a node
would download that transaction from every peer announcing it, because it has no
way presently to cache failure. Historically this hasn't been a big problem, but
if/when policy for accepting segwit transactions were to change (eg taproot, or
any other change), we could expect older nodes talking to newer nodes to be
wasting bandwidth because of this.

"As discussed in that issue, switching to wtxid-based relay solves this problem
-- by using an identifier for a transaction that commits to all the data in our
relay protocol, we can be certain if a transaction that a peer is announcing is
one that we've already tried to process, or if it's something new. This PR
introduces support for wtxid-based relay with peers that support it (and remains
backwards compatible with peers that use txids for relay, of course).

"Apart from code correctness, one issue to be aware of is that by downloading
from old and new peers alike, we should expect there to be some bandwidth
wasted, because sometimes we might download the same transaction via txid-relay
as well as wtxid-relay. The last commit in this PR implements a heuristic I want
to analyze, which is to just delay relay from txid-relay peers by 2 seconds, if
we have at least 1 wtxid-based peer. I've just started running a couple nodes
with this heuristic so I can measure how well it works, but I'm open to other
ideas for minimizing that issue. In the long run, I think this will be
essentially a non-issue, so I don't think it's too big a concern, we just need
to bite the bullet and deal with it during upgrade.

"Finally, this proposal would need a simple BIP describing the changes, which I
haven't yet drafted. However, review and testing of this code in the interim
would be welcome.

"To do items:

- Write BIP explaining the spec here (1 new p2p message for negotiating
  wtxid-based relay, along with a new INV type)

- Measure and evaluate a heuristic for minimizing how often a node downloads the
  same transaction twice, when connected to old and new nodes."

## Questions

- Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, ACK \<commit\>, or
  NACK?](https://jonatack.github.io/articles/how-to-review-pull-requests-in-bitcoin-core#peer-review)&nbsp;
  Don't forget to put your PR review on GitHub or [ask
  questions](https://jonatack.github.io/articles/how-to-review-pull-requests-in-bitcoin-core#ask-questions).

- Further questions TBA.

## Meeting Log

```
```
