---
layout: pr
date: 2021-01-20
title: "Check for non-representable CFeeRates"
pr: 20546
authors: [jonatack]
components: ["tx fees and policy", "wallet", "refactoring"]
host: jonatack
status: past
commit: ed414f6
---

## Notes

- Today's review club is A Tale of Two Fee Rate Units, and the ability starting
  from Bitcoin Core 0.21 to set one of them explicitly in Bitcoin Core's various
  send RPCs.

- Bitcoin Core has historically used fee rates denominated in bitcoins per 1000
  bytes (BTC/kB); post-segwit, the unit is 1000 virtual bytes (BTC/kvB).

- You can see this by running `./src/bitcoin-cli help settxfee` and
  `./src/bitcoind -help-debug | grep fee`

- Nevertheless, users have expressed what appears to be a long-standing
  preference for fee rates to be expressed in satoshis per vbyte (sat/vB)
  instead, which is a commonly used unit in other wallets. This demand can be
  seen, for instance, in Bitcoin Core
  [issues](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/gui/issues/64) and in [twitter
  polls](https://twitter.com/jonatack/status/1318890833131823104).

#### Background

- [PR 11413](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11413), "Add explicit
  feerate option," was merged in June 2020. That pull enabled users to
  specify for the first time a specific fee rate in some send RPCs. However, it
  did so by overloading the integer `conf_target` param/option to also accept
  floats or strings. Then, if a float or string was passed to represent a fee
  rate instead, the unit was taken from the `estimate_mode` param/option that
  the PR also overloaded. See [this
  comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11413#issuecomment-649730975)
  for more context.

- [Issue 19543](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/19543), "Normalize fee
  units for RPC (BTC/kB and sat/B)," was opened in July 2020 to address the
  problem.

- [PR 20220](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20220), "Explicit fee rate
  follow-ups/fixes for 0.21," was merged in November 2020 to provide a spec and
  regression coverage for the potential next step of moving to a universal fee
  rate argument in satoshis per vbyte (sat/vB) as well as immediate coverage and
  fixes for 0.21.

- [PR 20305](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20305), "Introduce
  `fee_rate` sat/vB param/option," was merged in November 2020 to address issue
  19543 and is part of the 0.21 release. It replaces overloading the
  `conf_target` and `estimate_mode` params/options with a new `fee_rate`
  param/option denominated in sat/vB in the sendtoaddress, sendmany, send,
  fundrawtransaction, walletcreatefundedpsbt, and bumpfee RPCs, as well as other
  fixes. It was followed by [PR
  20246](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20426), "Allow zero-fee
  fundrawtransaction/walletcreatefundedpsbt and other fixes," that was
  backported to 0.21.

#### Current situation

- RPCs `sendtoaddress`, `sendmany`, `send`, `fundrawtransaction`,
  `walletcreatefundedpsbt`, and `bumpfee` all allow specifying an explicit fee
  rate in sat/vB starting from Bitcoin Core v0.21 released in January 2021.

- It would be ideal
  for all fee rates to be in the same units. However, if you run `git grep
  feeRate`, you will see that we still have a similarly spelled `feeRate`
  (BTC/kvB) option in RPCs `fundrawtransaction` and `walletcreatefundedpsbt`
  that could confuse users, as `fee_rate` and `feeRate` have different units and
  similar spellings.

- [PR 20483](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20483), "deprecate feeRate
  in fundrawtransaction/walletcreatefundedpsbt," was opened to deprecate the
  `feeRate` option but cannot yet be considered. (Why?)

- All of the fee rate configuration options are currently still denominated in
  BTC/kvB units and need to be updated.

- [Issue 20534](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/20534), "sat/b values
  aren't validated to be in range," was opened in November 2020 and remains
  unresolved.

#### Code

- Today's PR is an accessible change to resolve issue 20534 while doing some
  `CFeeRate` refactoring (see the pull request description for details).

- The `CFeeRate` class in `src/policy/feerate.{h,cpp}` is responsible for
  constructing fee rates of different units. It also contains comparison
  operators and a `ToString()` helper function.

- `SetFeeEstimateMode()` in `src/wallet/rpcwallet.cpp` is the central function
  for setting fee estimation or the fee rate that is used by the wallet
  transaction RPCs and by `FundTransaction()` that some of the RPCs call
  through. These are all located in the same file, `rpcwallet.cpp`.

- `AmountFromValue()` in `src/rpc/util.cpp` is a frequently used utility that
  converts `UniValue` amounts from user input to `CAmount` values suitable for
  constructing `CFeeRate` objects.

## Questions

1.  Explain the difference between BTC/kvB and sat/vB units. A fee rate of 1
    BTC/kvB is equivalent to what fee rate in sat/vB?

2.  What is the difference between an RPC *parameter* and an RPC *option*?

3.  When making transactions, what fee practice does the ability to specify an
    explicit fee rate replace?

4.  At the time of this writing, why is it too early to deprecate the `feeRate`
    (BTC/kvB) option in `fundrawtransaction` and `walletcreatefundedpsbt` to
    avoid confusion with `fee_rate` (sat/vB)?

5.  After some discussion, a plan was made to complete the migration from
    BTC/kvB to sat/vB units. What is it? Does it make sense to you?

6.  In the meantime, if users confuse `fee_rate` with `feeRate` when making a
    transaction or fee bumping, why was the risk of losing funds considered low
    enough to be temporarily acceptable?

7.  What range of values is non-representable by `CFeeRate`? How does this PR
    resolve that? Is there a better approach?

8.  What is the "Named Constructor Idiom"? Why does this PR use it?

9.  The new utility function, `FeeRateFromValueInSatB()`, calls another utility
    function named `AmountFromValue()`. Why are there two of them in the
    codebase (one in `src/rpc/util.cpp` and one in `src/bitcoin-tx.cpp`)?

10. Running `./src/bitcoind -help-debug | grep fee` returns the fee rate
    configuration options. After `setfeerate` and `estimatefeerate` in sat/vB
    are added and `settxfee` and `estimatesmartfee` in BTC/kvB become hidden
    RPCs, what would be the best way to migrate the fee rate units in these
    configuration options from BTC/kvB to sat/vB?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
18:00 <jonatack> #startmeeting
18:00 <kanzure> hi
18:00 <jnewbery> hi
18:00 <murtyjones> hi
18:00 <svav> hi
18:00 <jonatack> Hi all! Welcome to this week's episode of the Bitcoin Core PR Review club. 🎉
18:00 <AnthonyRonning> hi
18:00 <pinheadmz> hi
18:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
18:00 <jonatack> We usually start Bitcoin Core IRC meetings with a 'hi' to know who is here. Feel free to say hi! If you have a signet address, append it your "hi" to receive some sBTC (signet coins) for good answers. 🍰
18:00 <norisgOG> Hi
18:00 <larryruane_> hi!
18:00 <jonatack> This week, we're talking about PR #20564 "Check for non-representable CFeeRates (tx fees and policy, wallet, refactoring)" which is a bugfix and part of our ongoing migration of fee rates units from BTC/kvB to sat/vB units (by popular demand). 🚀
18:00 <glozow> hiya
18:00 <jonatack> Notes and questions are at https://bitcoincore.reviews/20546 ✨
18:00 <n3wBEEEE> hi
18:01 <schmidty> howdy
18:01 <jonatack> pinheadz or I will send signet coins to people with good answers using the explicit fee rate feature. 🍰
18:01 <andozw> Hiiiii
18:01 <comfy> hi
18:01 <thomasb06> hi
18:01 <jonatack> Here is an RPC command template you can use to try sending coins to people (or to yourself) from your signet node using the new fee_rate param (just add their address):
18:01 <jonatack> ./src/bitcoin-cli -signet -named sendtoaddress address="" amount=0.01 fee_rate=1
18:01 <ccdle12> hi
18:01 <jonatack> or to yourself if no one posts a signet address :)))
18:01 <michaelfolkson> Don't know where the private key is but here's mine: tb1qmmn6u4y9wv3jvwgktyw42nc5ql7t6shs0f2229
18:02 <michaelfolkson> Lesson: don't lose your Signet private key
18:02 <sunon> Hi!
18:02 <AnthonyRonning> still need to set up a signet node
18:02 <jonatack> Anyone get a chance to read the notes and review the PR? y/n y/n
18:02 <AnthonyRonning> y
18:02 <norisgOG> y
18:02 <thomasb06> n
18:02 <murtyjones> yes to notes, no to PR
18:02 <sishir> ^^
18:03 <svav> y
18:03 <n3wBEEEE> nn
18:03 <sunon> y n
18:03 <michaelfolkson> y / 0.3y
18:03 <jonatack> Great, let's get started!
18:03 <jonatack> 1. Explain the difference between BTC/kvB and sat/vB units. A fee rate of 1 BTC/kvB is equivalent to what fee rate in sat/vB?
18:03 <sishir> “difference between BTC/kvB and sat/vB units means that a transaction with a fee rate mistakenly calculated in BTC/kvB rather than sat/vB should raise an error due to the fee rate being set too low.”
18:03 <norisgOG> 100000 sats per byte
18:03 <larryruane_> 100,000?
18:03 <emzy> hi
18:03 <goums> hi
18:03 <AnthonyRonning> 1 BTC/kvB = 100000 sat/vB
18:03 <emzy> n
18:04 <sunon> 100k
18:04 <thomasb06> same
18:04 <jonatack> nice! sBTC to sishir norisgOG larryruane_  and AnthonyRonning (if you post an address)
18:04 <larryruane_> is one advantage avoiding messy floating point?
18:04 <jonatack> sunon: yes!
18:04 <jonatack> A sat/vB is 1e5 times larger than a BTC/kvB, so 1 BTC/kvB is equal to 100000 sat/vB.
18:04 <jnewbery> 1e5
18:04 <larryruane_> tb1qc32gukwejqkyh7z3cyfafsg5spj0cd4hfml4rm
18:05 <michaelfolkson> 100 million sats in a Bitcoin. 1000 vB in a kvB
18:05 <jonatack> sBTC to jnewbery and sunon too
18:05 <jonatack> 2. What is the difference between an RPC *parameter* and an RPC *option*?
18:05 <thomasb06> a parameter is mandatory
18:05 <pinheadmz> 1 sBTC to larryruane_ !
18:05 <larryruane_> option is a boolean param?
18:05 <AnthonyRonning> parameters are required and options are optional
18:05 <murtyjones> required vs optional
18:06 <sishir> one is mandatory, the other is optional
18:06 <jonatack> interesting
18:06 <michaelfolkson> option has a dash before it, parameter doesn't
18:06 <jonatack> My answer was: An RPC parameter is a standalone input argument; an option is an argument inside the options JSON hash.
18:06 <jnewbery> I think the distinction is pretty pointless since we got named arguments a few releases ago
18:07 <michaelfolkson> Does this match standard Unix definitions? https://stackoverflow.com/questions/36495669/difference-between-terms-option-argument-and-parameter
18:07 <jnewbery> the options object doesn't benefit from the built-in type checking / help formatting that RPC parameters do
18:07 <jnewbery> and just make the call signature unnecessarily complex
18:08 <jonatack> i wonder if it was to allow avoiding positional param issues before we had named params
18:08 <jonatack> let's move on
18:08 <jonatack> (see bitcoin-cli help send for an example of both.)
18:08 <jonatack> 3. When making transactions, what fee practice does the ability to specify an explicit fee rate replace?
18:09 <AnthonyRonning> It replaces estimating fee based on desired confirmation target
18:09 <ccdle12> replaces the user of the fee estimator
18:09 <jonatack> Yes! Explicit fee rate is an alternative to using fee estimation with the conf_target and estimate_mode params/options, to allow Bitcoin Core to set the fee rate for you.
18:10 <jonatack> 4. Why is it too early to deprecate the `feeRate` (BTC/kvB) option in `fundrawtransaction` and `walletcreatefundedpsbt` to avoid confusion with `fee_rate` (sat/vB)?
18:10 <sishir> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20483
18:10 <sishir> The estimatesmartfee is still in BTC/kB, so merging this would force all users to do the conversion themselves (or force to pass -deprecatedrpc).
18:10 <AnthonyRonning> There was already a feature freeze for 0.21 but it should now be considered okay for 22.0, right?
18:10 <michaelfolkson> What's the history on the fee estimator? I'm presuming that this is pretty similar to the fee estimators on other non-Core wallets?
18:10 <jonatack> sishir: correct!
18:11 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: all of the feerate changes were merged after the 0.21 FF given they were considered fixes to an open issue
18:12 <AnthonyRonning> ahh, gotcha. wasn't sure if some where merged in before.
18:13 <jonatack> I proposed to deprecate feeRate but because people may use RPC estimatesmartfee to estimate the fee needed, but that RPC returns the fee rate in BTC/kvB and not in sat/vB, it was considered to early.
18:13 <svav> What is the difference between a virtual byte and a byte?
18:13 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: I don't know. I do like to be able to set the fee rate explicitly and use this feature most of the time.
18:14 <jonatack> svav: good question. anyone want to reply?
18:14 <michaelfolkson> svav: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/89385/is-there-a-difference-between-bytes-and-virtual-bytes-vbytes
18:14 <ccdle12> svav: vbytes referes to the txs size in weight (segwit), bytes is simply the raw byte lenght of the tx
18:14 <thomasb06> vB is 1000 instead of 1024
18:15 <thomasb06> arg..
18:15 <michaelfolkson> Bytes are bytes. Virtual bytes are adjusted bytes based on SegWit adjustment
18:15 <sishir> svav vsize aka vytes is tx using weighted size under segwit rules
18:15 <sishir> * vbytes
18:15 <larryruane_> so a tx's size in vbytes is always greater-or-equal to its size in bytes?
18:15 <comfy> vB is a synthetic unit to estimate the byte load for transactions on the chain, post-segwit
18:16 <michaelfolkson> Lesser or equal larryruane_
18:16 <jonatack> have a look at https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki
18:16 <sishir> I think vbytes is lesser
18:16 <norisgOG> thomasb06 I thought vbytes of a presegwit tx are equal to psot segwit therefore I think still both 1024 bytes
18:17 <norisgOG> but the meaning is diffrent
18:17 <thomasb06> norisgOG: definitely
18:17 <sunon> Bit late but tb1qg0x546029q0ee3cuuvlx46anxrlsfkk5qy27eg
18:18 <jonatack> feel free to continue discussing while we keep moving
18:18 <jonatack> sunon: yay!
18:18 <jonatack> 5. A plan was made to complete the migration from BTC/kvB to sat/vB units. What is it? Does it make sense to you?
18:18 <jonatack> hint https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20484#issuecomment-734786305
18:19 <AnthonyRonning> ah cool, i couldn't for the life of me figure out where the plan was
18:19 <michaelfolkson> I think so. Don't understand exactly why that ordering made the most sense but seems reasonable
18:19 <emzy> I think mostly user demand.
18:19 <sishir> Wallet demands as well
18:20 <jonatack> emzy: yes, dev pushback on not breaking user space
18:20 <pinheadmz> sunon 1 sBTC for u !
18:20 <jonatack> It seemed the best way to normalize and transition to sat/vB per user demand, protect users by not having feeRate/feerate in BTC/kvB and fee_rate in sat/vB in the same RPCs, and minimize the amount of breaking API changes.
18:20 <jonatack> 6. In the meantime, if users confuse fee_rate with feeRate when making a transaction or fee bumping, why is the risk of losing funds considered low enough to be temporarily acceptable?
18:21 <AnthonyRonning> because they get a nice fast confirmation :)
18:22 <michaelfolkson> This was the rationale that the user would underpay on fee when overpaying on the fee would be more of a concern. Right?
18:22 <murtyjones> i presume the wallet software would reject fees that are wildly high/low?
18:22 <svav> When instroducing new feerate variable, why not name it more differently from existing fee rate to avoid confusion?
18:22 <jonatack> note that we deliberately broke backward compatibility wrt fee_rate in RPC bumpfee
18:22 <larryruane_> because specifying the old units (BTC/kvB) results in a too-low fee when the actual units are sat/vB?
18:22 <emzy> I think it will be so high that there sould be a warning.
18:22 <norisgOG> users fee estimate is 1/100000 lower if he confuses both
18:23 <jonatack> svav: initially i named it fee_rate_sat_vb, but reviewers considered it best to use fee_rate and i agree
18:23 <larryruane_> there's been a worldwide shortage of underscores, we must conserve them!
18:23 <jonatack> Pretty good replies. Luckily, the 1e5 difference is large enough that any user confusion should be benign.
18:24 <jonatack> Specifying BTC/vkB (current value) in place of the new sat/vB would always be a much lower feerate. So it'd most likely be too low and error, or worst case lower than you intended and you can just bump it again to fix.
18:24 <AnthonyRonning> ahh i had that backwards
18:24 <jonatack> Or as Murch wrote, "In the worst case, someone is going to get upped to the minRelayTxFee silently and send at 1 sat/vB. Since RBF is on by default, they should be able to bump when they notice."
18:25 <svav> In your new code, could you code it so that the units are specified in a separate variable, in case you ever want to change units again?
18:25 <jonatack> Ok, let's move into the code
18:25 <jonatack> 7. What range of values is non-representable by CFeeRate? How does this PR resolve that? Is there a better approach?
18:25 <AnthonyRonning> 0 to 0.001, non inclusive. It checks if, after conversion, if the value is zero but the initial value was not zero. Checking for `> 0 && < 0.001` instead of allocating a `CFeeRate` could be another approach.
18:26 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: correct!
18:26 <Murch> Hey, sorry, I had a conflicting meeting, but this one is totally down my alley ^^
18:27 <Murch> sishir: Yes, a transactions virtualsize is strictly smaller or equal to its raw byte size.
18:27 <jonatack> Murch: hi! yeah Murch was co-author and a major reviewer behind these changes
18:27 <Murch> norisgOG: there are 1000 bytes in a kB in Bitcoin :-/
18:28 <norisgOG> Murch thx
18:28 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: which approach of the two would you use?
18:29 <sishir> Murch Thankyou
18:29 <AnthonyRonning> i typically would use the range check. Is there a reason why allocating `CFeeRate` is done here? Is there a hidden benefit i'm missing?
18:29 <AnthonyRonning> performance, or otherwise
18:30 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: no, strangely enough I only thought of the first way
18:31 <AnthonyRonning> less use of magic numbers though, so there's a benefit there
18:31 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: thanks for the ideas.
18:31 <jonatack> 8. What is the Named Constructor Idiom?  Why does this PR use it?
18:32 <AnthonyRonning> A way to be more explicit about the object you are creating. This PR uses it by `CFeeRate::FromSatB` and `CFeeRate::FromBtcKb` .
18:32 <svav> To distinguish between the old charge units and the new ones.
18:32 <AnthonyRonning> never heard of that term before but i think that's the idea
18:33 <jonatack> Yes, several contributors found the current constructor confusing to use
18:33 <michaelfolkson> https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Named_Constructor
18:33 <AnthonyRonning> I still see some places in code that use `CFeeRate(X, 1000)`, is there further refactoring that could be implemented to be consistent?
18:33 <AnthonyRonning> for instance, here https://github.com/jonatack/bitcoin/blob/ed414f6dd72c103b5ba9e17c6b6bd2bcc8548b5b/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L3962
18:33 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: yes
18:34 <jonatack> I found it in isocpp.org/wiki/faq/ctors#named-ctor-idiom by Stroustrup, Cline, Sutter and Alexandrescu. Its goal is to provide more intuitive and/or safer construction operations for users of your class.
18:35 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: yes, good eye. I didn't change them all, maybe I should.
18:36 <jonatack> There are a few that cannot be changed, however, but most cases are covered by the named ctors
18:36 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: nice link, thanks
18:37 <jonatack> This PR uses the Named Constructor Idiom to encapsulate the confusing "pass COIN for sat/vB, 1000 for
18:37 <jonatack> BTC/kvB to the ctor" into CFeeRate itself, by popular demand as requested by several contributors. One example is at https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20305#discussion_r519986635
18:37 <larryruane_> Seems like named constructors are nice when the argument list can't be used to distinguish between different forms of initializers (e.g. both take uint64_t but the units are different, as is the case here)... nice! I wasn't aware of this!
18:38 <jonatack> larryruane_: right! i like it too
18:39 <jonatack> Question: are you people concept ACK on using the IsZero() member function to replace CFeeRate() == 0 conditionals?
18:40 <jonatack> I found it curious to construct just to check for a zero CFeeRate
18:40 <AnthonyRonning> yeah i think it makes sense to me to be more explicit about it
18:40 <murtyjones> encapsulating code like that seems useful to me, for auditability if nothing else
18:41 <jonatack> and there a quite a few of those in the codebase
18:41 <larryruane_> i like it too, it's like isNull
18:42 <jonatack> 9. FeeRateFromValueInSatB calls another utility function named AmountFromValue. Why are there two AmountFromValue functions in the codebase (one in src/rpc/util.cpp and one in src/bitcoin-tx.cpp)?
18:42 <jonatack> (thanks for the feedback!)
18:42 <AnthonyRonning> Because you can work with transactions through the RPC and the command line (from what i can tell), and `AmountFromValue` should always be used when inputing numerical values from the user.
18:43 <SurajUpadhyay> Is the meeting for today over ??
18:43 <jonatack> about question 9: when i needed to call AmountFromValue from src/bitcoin-cli.cpp, i found i needed to make a *third* copy of this function
18:44 <michaelfolkson> SurajUpadhyay: No, in progress
18:44 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: right! but why are there two of them?
18:45 <AnthonyRonning> ah yeah, better question. I'm not sure, is there not a better place for utility functions to exist? Or are they slightly different, need to check again.
18:45 <jonatack> hint, look in test/lint/lint-circular-dependencies.sh
18:45 <larryruane_> i notice the exceptions they throw is different
18:47 <jonatack> I couldn't pull it into bitcoin-cli.cpp without adding a circular dependency
18:47 <jonatack> "policy/fees -> txmempool -> policy/fees"
18:47 <jonatack> at least, that is my recollection, i could be wrong!
18:48 <Murch> Given that there are quite a few types of amounts in the codebase that have distinct ranges and shouldn't be easily added together, have there been more attempts to make classes for specific types of amounts?
18:48 <larryruane_> if this doesn't sidetrack the discussion too much (feel free to ignore), what's the reason we even check for circular dependencies? what goes wrong if we don't? there are exceptions anyway....
18:48 <murtyjones> i see. given that there's a manual linter, does C++ not do any kind of circularity checking when it compiles?
18:48 <michaelfolkson> I have same question larryruane_
18:48 <jonatack> larryruane_: i think we really really don't want more circular dependencies, but it requires some refactoring to remove them
18:49 <svav> How is a circular dependency introduced?
18:50 <jonatack> the current assumeUXTO PR adds one, for instance, but pulling things out of validation code isn't easy
18:51 <jonatack> svav: by code pulling in headers that link to each other, though that's not an official definition
18:52 <michaelfolkson> And this bash script checks no new ones are introduced?
18:52 <jonatack> murtyjones: i'd have to look
18:52 <murtyjones> no biggie just curious.
18:52 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: yes, other than the permitted exceptions
18:53 <jonatack> in EXPECTED_CIRCULAR_DEPENDENCIES
18:53 <jonatack> if you add one and don't add it to that list, the CI fails
18:54 <michaelfolkson> I wouldn't describe that as linter/linting but heh
18:54 <jonatack> 10. What would be the best way to migrate the config option fee rate units in the from BTC/kvB to sat/vB?
18:54 <jonatack> ./src/bitcoind -help-debug | grep fee
18:55 <AnthonyRonning> i've seen other projects create a new variable. So an example could be `maxtxfeesat` instead of `maxtxfee`
18:55 <jonatack> will show you the config options
18:55 <AnthonyRonning> then deprecate the old one eventually
18:56 <jonatack> AnthonyRonning: one thing i've noticed is the older options often use "fee" both for an absolute fee and a fee rate
18:56 <jonatack> which helps for naming, e.g. RPC settxfee to setfeerate for the sat/vB version
18:56 <jonatack> or estimatesmartfee -> estimatefeerate
18:56 <michaelfolkson> Do you need to do the normal two version deprecating or can you just supply error messages and do it straight away?
18:57 <michaelfolkson> I guess you don't know
18:57 <michaelfolkson> So like a warning rather than an error message
18:57 <Murch> michaelfolkson: It's preferable not to break userspace
18:57 <jonatack> michaelfolkson: idk, we did simply remove a banscore config option in 0.21 without any deprecation period
18:57 <Murch> there are a lot of people running automated scripts against full nodes
18:57 <jonatack> we wouldn't have done that with the RPC API
18:58 <michaelfolkson> Right, good point Murch
18:58 <AnthonyRonning> oh didn't notice that, yeah i see that now. It could have been better to be more explicit between the two in the first place, in retrospect
18:58 <Murch> I mean, good practice is to test new versions first, but I know a lot of businesses just yolo upgrades
18:58 <jonatack> I would imagine we'd have to add as AnthonyRonning suggests
18:58 <Murch> It would be fair to say that it's their fault, but still
18:59 <TechMiX> AnthonyRonning: sounds like a good idea to me
18:59 <AnthonyRonning> i think c-lightning and/or lnd had to introduce a new one for `msat`, and eventually deprecating `sat`
18:59 <jonatack> that makes sense to me
18:59 <Murch> AnthonyRonning: The downside with making parameter names even more explicit is that you're then stuck with that name even when the old one is long forgotten
19:00 <jonatack> That's time! Thanks everyone!
19:00 <jonatack> #endmeeting
19:00 <Murch> so it comes down to a trade-off between a shortterm confusion and a long term clunky name
19:00 <comfy> ty jonatack et al
19:00 <AnthonyRonning> Murch: yeah good point
19:00 <AnthonyRonning> thank you jonatack! And everyone else. Very informative.
19:00 <jnewbery> thanks jonatack!
19:00 <michaelfolkson> Great notes and sess jonatack. Thanks!
19:00 <thomasb06> thanks jonatack
19:00 <schmidty> thanks jonatack !
19:00 <emzy> Thank you jonatack
19:00 <ecola> thanks jonatack
19:00 <jnewbery> next week, glozow hosts. Notes and questions will be up this Friday
19:01 <jonatack> I learned some things from you all and see things to think more about, thanks!
19:01 <glozow> great notes as always jonatack, hard to follow u
19:01 <svav> Thanks jonatack
19:01 <norisgOG> thanks jonatack
19:02 <n3wBEEEE> thank you all - this was very i9nformative for me
{% endirc %}
