---
layout: pr
date: 2021-03-31
title: "Reduce addr blackholes"
pr: 21528
authors: [amitiuttarwar]
components: ["p2p"]
host: amitiuttarwar
status: past
commit: 0c194ff
---

## Notes

* The Bitcoin network uses `addr` messages to communicate network addresses
  (the locations of nodes). See the [Bitcoin wiki p2p
  documentation](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_documentation#addr) for
  more details.

* Good address propagation improves network connectivity and increases the
  difficulty of executing an eclipse attack.

* Bitcoin Core nodes will periodically self-announce (also known as
  self-advertise) their own network address to peers.

* When a Bitcoin Core node receives an `addr` message that contains 10
  addresses or fewer, it forwards them to 1 or 2 peers, selected at random.
  If we assume all nodes do this, then self-announcements should reach a large
  portion of the nodes on the network.

* However, we know that some nodes on the network do _not_ relay `addr` messages
  that they receive. Two known cases are block-relay-only connections from Bitcoin
  Core nodes, and connections from certain light clients. We refer to these
  connections as `addr` black holes. `addr` messages go in, but they never escape!

* If a large portion of the connections on the network are `addr` black holes, then
  `addr` propagation is impacted. Self-announcements won't reach a majority of nodes
  on the network. It'd be better if we could somehow avoid picking black holes as
  the 1 or 2 peers that we select for relaying `addr` messages to.

* This PR defers initialization of `m_addr_known` of inbound peers until the
  peer sends an address related message (`addr`, `addrv2`, `getaddr` or
  `sendaddrv2`). The node uses the presence of `m_addr_known` to decide whether
  the peer is a candidate for relaying `addr` messages received from the
  network.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. What is an `addr` black hole? Why is this a concern for `addr` propagation?

3. How does Bitcoin Core implement self-announcements? How would you expect a
   single advertisement to propagate throughout the network?

4. How does this PR propose to improve `addr` black holes? What are possible
   issues an approach like this could have? What does this approach *not*
   address?

5. What are the `addr` related p2p messages in the bitcoin protocol? What do
   each of them mean? How does the logic to send and receive each message
   change with this PR?

6. Could this change potentially be disruptive to other software on the
   network? How so?

7. What are alternative approaches for achieving the intended goal?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <amiti> #startmeeting
19:00 <jnewbery> hi!
19:00 <amiti> hi!
19:00 <glozow> hi
19:00 <petroleum> hi
19:00 <ccdle12> hi
19:00 <genef> hi
19:00 <svav> hi
19:00 <tkc_> hi
19:00 <amiti> welcome everyone!
19:00 <b10c> hi
19:00 <lightlike> hi
19:00 <amiti> anyone here for the first time?
19:01 <ivanacostarubio> hi
19:01 <emzy> hi
19:01 <amiti> some reminders - all questions are welcome, we're here to learn :)
19:01 <amiti> and feel free to ask them whenever, no need to ask to ask
19:02 <amiti> who got a chance to review the PR this week? (y / n)
19:02 <genef> y
19:02 <b10c> y
19:02 <svav> y
19:02 <ccdle12> y
19:02 <jnewbery> (notes and questions here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/21528)
19:02 <jnewbery> y
19:02 <lightlike> y
19:02 <amiti> wow lots of review!
19:02 <ivanacostarubio> y
19:02 <sishir> y
19:03 <glozow> y
19:03 <amiti> first question: Did you review the PR? Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK? What was your review approach?
19:03 <emzy> n
19:04 <amiti> a good time for general thoughts about the PR :)
19:04 <ccdle12> concept ACK
19:04 <genef> Concept ACK, light code review
19:04 <b10c> concept ack
19:04 <ivanacostarubio> concept ACK.
19:04 <schmidty> y
19:05 <jnewbery> Concept ACK, approach ACK
19:05 <amiti> would anyone like to summarize the goal of the PR?
19:05 <amiti> related to question 2: What is an addr black hole? Why is this a concern for addr propagation?
19:05 <svav> Prevent eclipse attacks
19:05 <sishir> in some nodes set of addresses will go in but do not escape, they do not propagate in time
19:05 <ccdle12> reliable propagation of addr announcements
19:06 <amiti> svav: indeed, the goal of good addr relay is to be robust to eclipse attacks, can you describe more about what part specifically this PR contributes to?
19:06 <amiti> sishir, ccdle12: yes!
19:06 <petroleum> Does this PR *reduce the occurrence* of addr blackholes or is it more /reducing addr data propagation overhead/?
19:06 <glozow> i thought of black hole just in relation to our node (they wont forward addrs we send them) and not necessarily that they dont participate in addr relay at all
19:06 <petroleum> seems more the later, to me
19:07 <amiti> glozow: good clarification! yes they could be either
19:07 <amiti> does anyone want to answer petroleum's question ?
19:07 <ivanacostarubio> Make sure we won't send addr messages to peers that won't relay those messages
19:07 <amiti> ivanacostarubio: yup
19:08 <sishir> I thought this feature is not relaying addr at all to block-relay-only nodes and light clients so reduce occurrence?
19:08 <amiti> sishir: exactly
19:08 <amiti> petroleum: does that make sense?
19:08 <petroleum> amiti so the later part of my sentence?
19:08 <glozow> neither
19:08 <petroleum> e.g. communication overhead reduction
19:08 <petroleum> oh
19:09 <amiti> oh I see what you mean
19:09 <petroleum> I don't see how it's exclusively the later and none of the former (in my original question)
19:09 <amiti> I guess latter, but I'd phrase it differently
19:09 <petroleum> block-relay-only will always be an addr black hole
19:09 <petroleum> got it
19:09 <lightlike> I'd say that it does reduce the occurrence of black holes, because we relay a given ADDR to a limited number of nodes, and those messages that aren't sent to black holes will be sent to other nodes instead.
19:10 <amiti> lightlike: great description. thanks!
19:10 <petroleum> lightlike yeah good perspective
19:10 <amiti> ok, so lets dig in to how / why
19:10 <amiti> How does Bitcoin Core implement self-announcements? How would you expect a single advertisement to propagate throughout the network?
19:11 <sishir> Q. Does advertising mean that node is putting itself out to get connected to?
19:11 <svav> Periodic self announcement by nodes
19:12 <ccdle12> in SendMessages, our node will check if the peer can relay addrs, we are not in IBD and if the `m_next_local_addr` is expired
19:12 <amiti> sishir: yes
19:13 <genef> peer self-announces, addr gets fanned out by those nodes, then those nodes send off again to another send of nodes, repeat
19:13 <genef> set* of nodes
19:13 <amiti> ccdle12: yup! I believe you're referring to the periodic self announcements we initiate in SendMessages
19:13 <svav> Internode communication is dependent on Bitcoin protocol version
19:13 <amiti> that can be found here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/b14462083f82aeaa9a376978f210db5538db296f/src/net_processing.cpp#L4198-L4214
19:14 <svav> What bit of code determines node self announcement? How often does self announcement happen?
19:14 <amiti> genef: that relay pattern is true, but do you know what the "fan" factor is?
19:15 <amiti> svav: see the code I just linked :)
19:15 <glozow> not sure if someome already mentioned, we do one after connecting (outbound) to a node and receiving `VERSION` from them: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/267b60f800cb298d6700ae54fdace595c0e80313/src/net_processing.cpp#L2435-L2458
19:15 <amiti> glozow: yes!
19:16 <amiti> so, there are two code paths that initiate self announcements, which glozow & I have just linked
19:16 <amiti> 1. when we receive a `VERSION` message from a outbound not-block-relay-only peer, we will announce our address
19:16 <lightlike> svav: once a day on average, AVG_LOCAL_ADDRESS_BROADCAST_INTERVAL = 24h in net_processing.cpp
19:16 <jnewbery> gleb had a PR to consolidate those two self-announcement mechanisms a bit: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19843 . The PR needs a bit of love and rebase now.
19:17 <amiti> 2. what lightlike just said, once a day on average per peer
19:17 <amiti> so, lets understand these two a bit better- why would we announce our own address after we've connected to a peer?
19:17 <glozow> is addr self-announcement on a poisson timer for privacy or for fanciness or?
19:18 <b10c> it could be that we just joined the network and nobody knows us yet?
19:18 <sishir> to ensure that newly connected node becomes well known and better connected
19:19 <amiti> glozow: good question. let me ask you one in return- is privacy a concern when announcing your address?
19:19 <amiti> b10c, sishir: right, the behavior is asymmetric. if node A connects to node B, node B might not actually know node A's address
19:20 <amiti> so node A announces
19:20 <sishir> Does newly connected node sends addr & getaddr at the same time?
19:20 <amiti> after that announcement, what would we expect the propagation pattern to look like on the network ?
19:20 <amiti> (that announcement, or any announcement really)
19:21 <b10c> amiti: oh right, because with TCP you connect FROM a different port that you are listening on (and B doesn't know if you are listening at all).
19:21 <glozow> amiti: i can't really think of what you'd want to hide when self-announcing
19:22 <amiti> sishir: relevant code here https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/b14462083f82aeaa9a376978f210db5538db296f/src/net_processing.cpp#L2435-L2464, the logic paths are fired at the same time, but we send the getaddr right away, and queue up the addr for a bit later (when we process in SendMessages)
19:22 <sugarjig> Wouldn't node B only forward the addr message to 1 or 2 other nodes?
19:23 <b10c> amiti: B sends addr-of-A to other nodes
19:23 <amiti> b10c: exactly
19:23 <amiti> glozow: me neither!
19:23 <amiti> sugarjig: yup
19:24 <b10c> but if all B's would send it to their peers we'd flood, right? that's why we only send to 1 or 2 peers
19:24 <amiti> b10c: I don't understand this statement
19:25 <amiti> so, a node initiates a self announcement, and then when a peer receives the announcement it forwards the address to 1-2 peers
19:25 <amiti> see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/b14462083f82aeaa9a376978f210db5538db296f/src/net_processing.cpp#L2680
19:25 <amiti> and "addr black holes" are when it doesn't actually forward it
19:26 <amiti> and this was already mentioned, some reasons for that could be: its a block-relay-only connection or its a light client
19:26 <genef> why don't block-only relays participate in addr forwarding?
19:26 <amiti> genef: good question, anyone know the answer?
19:27 <svav> When you create a node, how does it determine the first address of another node to connect to?
19:27 <genef> svav: DNS seeds
19:27 <amiti> so, the reason black holes could be an issue is if the addresses are not really getting propagated well around the network
19:27 <b10c> amiti: to rephrase RE propagation pattern: A self-announces to B, B only relays it to 1 or 2 peers as otherwise (compared to relay to e.g. all 50 peers) we'd flood the network with addr's, right?
19:27 <emzy> amiti: to prevent mapping the network.
19:28 <amiti> b10c: yup. correct
19:28 <ccdle12> couldn't an attacker determine a block-relay-only node by seeing that they don't forward addrs?
19:28 <sishir> genef why don't block-only relays participate in addr forwarding? +1
19:29 <glozow> because block-relay-only is block-relay-only
19:29 <genef> glozow: guess that makes sense, thought it just referred to they don't relay tx. really does mean "block"-only, lol
19:30 <lightlike> ccdle12: block-relay-only is not a node property, it's a connection property, currently a node has only 2 outgoing block-relay only connections. you could think of it as an extra stealthy network within the network.
19:30 <sishir> I though addr was just used for propagation? What do they do with the addr then
19:30 <emzy> Via addr forwardings you can figure out which node is connected to which. Blocks-only prevents to find out about all connections of a node.
19:31 <amiti> some good questions and answers here :)
19:31 <sishir> lightlike ✅
19:31 <amiti> addr forwarding leaks some info about node topology, so block-relay-only connections wanted to avoid that entirely
19:31 <glozow> note difference between `-blocksonly` mode and a block-relay-only connection
19:32 <amiti> ok, so hopefully this is making sense so far
19:32 <amiti> lets move on to the next question:
19:32 <amiti> How does this PR propose to improve addr black holes? What are possible issues an approach like this could have? What does this approach not address?
19:32 <genef> maybe unrelated to this pr: could addr be forwarded using a Dandelion++-like protocol to obscure the origin-dest?
19:32 <emzy> glozow: good point. I was talking about block-relay-onl
19:32 <genef> ^background q
19:32 <glozow> genef: why do we want to obscure origin of addr?
19:33 <genef> this PR doesn't send to nodes that don't participate in addr propagation
19:33 <amiti> so let's clarify this: when relaying addrs, what relevant information is private vs public?
19:33 <genef> glozow: for the same reason block-only don't propagate, prevent addr mapping
19:33 <sishir> IP address
19:34 <amiti> so the contents of the addr message is my ip address / location
19:35 <amiti> I want this to be public information
19:35 <amiti> that's why I'm sending it out
19:35 <amiti> but, the pattern of how it gets sent out might reveal node topology, aka which peers I am connected to
19:35 <amiti> and that is something I want to keep private
19:36 <amiti> because if an attacker knows the network topology, it could make an attack like causing a partition tangibly easier
19:36 <amiti> does this make sense to people?
19:37 <ivanacostarubio> https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/p2p_networking.html#addr
19:37 <genef> yes
19:37 <sugarjig> Yes!
19:37 <sishir> YES!
19:37 <ivanacostarubio> Yes. It makes sense
19:37 <amiti> awesome!
19:37 <amiti> cool, so lets go back to question 4:
19:37 <amiti> How does this PR propose to improve addr black holes? What are possible issues an approach like this could have? What does this approach not address?
19:37 <sishir> Postpones initialize of m_addr_known until peers sends an address related message
19:39 <amiti> sishir: yes! and then what do we do with that information? (of whether m_addr_known is initialized)
19:39 <lightlike> for outbound connections, nothing changes
19:39 <amiti> lightlike: good observation :)
19:40 <sishir> for inbound initialize filter when we get addr messages
19:40 <amiti> yup
19:40 <b10c> does not change: one (or multiple) mallilicous peers could still be a addr-blackholes
19:41 <amiti> b10c: correct
19:41 <glozow> i also like that the PR makes nodes stop sending `SENDADDRV2` to block-relay-only peers
19:41 <amiti> so, we defer initializing `m_addr_known` for inbound peers until they send us a message that has to do with addrs
19:42 <amiti> how does this link back to not sending to black holes ?
19:42 <sugarjig> If we've never gotten an addr-related message from a peer, there's a good chance they could be a black hole
19:42 <genef> consider an inbound peer a black hole until they send addr info?
19:42 <amiti> yup, exactly!
19:43 <oldgoat5> "How does this PR propose to improve addr black holes?" - this pr appears to add a SetupAddressRelay flag, which can be set to true for full nodes, and false for light clients.  Currently some nodes are not likely to forward addresses (light clients), thus some announcements will be lost.  This pr wants nodes to declare whether they will forward
19:43 <oldgoat5> a relay or not, so the source nodes can skip light clients.
19:43 <oldgoat5> is this correct^?
19:43 <amiti> oldgoat5: mostly, but some clarifications: 1. there are other types of connections that won't forward addresses, eg. block-relay-only conn or potentially other software on the network
19:44 <amiti> 2. we use a heuristic to set the flag, and the heuristic is whether the conn is outbound, or inbound & send addr- related message
19:45 <lightlike> where did a typical light client that doesn't participate in addr relay but somehow managed to connect to us get our IP? From the DNS seeds?
19:45 <amiti> lightlike: great question, I don't know. does anybody else know ?
19:47 <ccdle12> maybe from websites like bitnodes? an edge case but they must have a db of node ips
19:47 <amiti> ok, we can keep this as an open question and keep moving :)
19:47 <amiti> lets discuss this part of the question: What are possible issues an approach like this could have?
19:48 <amiti> lightlike: you already brought up a potential problem at the bitcoin-dev meeting last week :)
19:48 <genef> could prematurely exlude nodes from addr relay
19:48 <b10c> I think BTCPayServer's NXExplorer does connect via P2P to your node and doesn't have anywhere to forward addr's
19:48 <jnewbery> lightlike: good question! Maybe it connected to some hard-coded peers, sent a getaddr to get a diversity of peers and then connected to some of them (?)
19:49 <amiti> genef: yes exactly
19:50 <svav> How many other nodes is a given node typically connected to?
19:50 <sugarjig> A node may not have any inbound peers that have announced an addr message, so could itself be a black hole
19:50 <amiti> and that would suck, because this is the main technique for ongoing addr relay, so if a node doesn't hear about addrs, it would be more vulnerable to being eclipsed
19:50 <amiti> sugarjig: not quite, what about outbounds?
19:51 <genef> could it attempt to reseed from DNS peers again?
19:51 <amiti> svav: default values in bitcoin core are 8 outbound full relay, 2 block relay only peers, 125 total
19:51 <amiti> but there is also other software on the netwrok
19:51 <sugarjig> amiti: yep, if it has outbounds, then we're good
19:52 <amiti> sugarjig: oh interesting. I don't think bitcoin core can run on an inbound-only method. I'd have to check that you can't do something weird with startup flags though
19:53 <amiti> genef: yes, but unlikely. we also have other methods for getting addresses such as sending GETADDR when we connect to outbound peers
19:53 <genef> +1
19:53 <amiti> so, I think the biggest concern with this proposal is that we don't accidentally exclude nodes from addr relay that are depending on it
19:54 <amiti> one piece of feedback that has been given to me is that I should communicate about this on the bitcoin-dev mailing list & research the expectations of other software on the network
19:55 <amiti> we can reasonably build confidence around behavior of bitcoin core nodes, but thats not sufficient
19:55 <amiti> so this kinda covers question #6 around how we could disrupt other software
19:55 <ccdle12> curious, what are the other pieces of software on the network that needs to be taken into account?
19:56 <amiti> we have 5 minutes left, which I don't think is enough to dig into question #5 or 7, so I'll open the floor to any remaining questions about addr relay
19:56 <glozow> i have a clarification question, if you're about to relay addrs and you have 0 candidates (e.g. no m_addr_known with any of your peers) for any of your non-source peers, do you also just not relay it?
19:56 <amiti> ccdle12: anything else running bitcoin protocol. there are some open source ones and there would be private ones too.
19:57 <svav> Why do you want to cut-off sending to blackhole addresses completely? Is that necessary?
19:57 <genef> do you think a DHT or using dandelion++ could help with obfuscating network topology?
19:57 <amiti> glozow: yes I believe so
19:57 <amiti> glozow: we could edit the tests to see, but pretty sure the `sort_func` in `RelayAddress` would just come up empty
19:57 <sishir> I gotta head out but thank you amiti! Learned a lot today
19:57 <svav> Isn't it only a problem if a node sends messages out to ALL blackholes? So, can you just write the code to prevent this?
19:57 <amiti> genef: what is DHT?
19:57 <glozow> distributed hash table
19:58 <genef> distributed hash table ^
19:58 <amiti> genef: dandelion could definitely help obfuscate network topo through tx relay
19:58 <lightlike> this touches #7, but I'm really interested in it: have you considered the alternative approach treating addr messages to potential black holes as additional messages (but not stopping them) - e.g. relaying to one more peer if we suspect our peer is a black hole?
19:58 <amiti> oh, um, I guess depends on how it was used??
19:58 <amiti> lightlike: great question! and yes, I'm trying to think that through right now
19:59 <amiti> on one hand, that change can be considered "safer" because the observable addr propagation on the network shouldn't change
19:59 <svav> Yes, it's not a problem if you send a msg to a blackhold, but it is if you are sending to only blackholes, right?
20:00 <amiti> on the other hand, that behavior might be exploitable because you're relying on the peer to indicate to you whether or not they are a black hole, and maybe that could lead to them receiving more addrs than otherwise?
20:00 <amiti> ok! that's time! thanks for playing everyone :)
20:00 <amiti> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
