---
layout: pr
date: 2021-12-22
title: "Multiprocess bitcoin"
pr: 10102
authors: [ryanofsky]
components: ["gui", "rpc/rest/zmq"]
host: ryanofsky
status: past
commit: 8a18a12a232
---

## Notes

Currently Bitcoin Core code always runs within a single operating system
[process](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_(computing)). So if you are
running `bitcoind`, then you are running node and wallet code together in the
same process. If you are running `bitcoin-qt`, then you are running node,
wallet, and GUI code in the same process. Running all code in one process does
not provide a lot of isolation, so it means a crash in wallet code could bring
down the node, or a vulnerablility in the node could expose wallet data.
Additionally it's not possible to run the node and wallet on different machines,
or to stop and start the GUI independently of the node, or use the GUI to
connect to nodes or wallets on headless machines.

PR [#10102](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10102) starts to move away
from the single process model by adding basic support needed for bitcoin node,
wallet, and GUI code to run in different processes and communicate with each
other internally. Followups
[#19460](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19460) and
[#19461](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19461) expand on it to allow
wallet and GUI processes to be started and stopped independently, and allow the
processes to communicate with each other externally, and run on different
machines.

PR [#10102](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10102), combined with the
`--enable-multiprocess` build option, builds a new `bitcoin-node` executable
that can be used as a drop-in replacement for `bitcoind`, and a new
`bitcoin-gui` executable that can be used a drop-in replacement of `bitcoin-qt`.
The new executables are used the same way as the previous ones and don't provide
any new features externally, but internally they will spawn multiple processes
and use process separation. Instructions for building and testing #10102 can be
found in
[`doc/multiprocess.md`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/doc/multiprocess.md#installation)
and can be done in a few commands on linux:

```bash
cd <BITCOIN_SOURCE_DIRECTORY>
make -C depends NO_QT=1 MULTIPROCESS=1
CONFIG_SITE=$PWD/depends/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu/share/config.site ./configure
make
src/bitcoin-node -regtest -printtoconsole -debug=ipc
```

When this is run, `bitcoin-node` will spawn a `bitcoin-wallet` executable to run
wallet code. The node and wallet processes will communicate across a socket,
with the node code controlling the wallet with
[`interfaces::WalletClient`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/interfaces/wallet.h#L310-L313)
methods, and the wallet code calling the node with
[`interfaces::Chain`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/interfaces/chain.h#L92)
methods. Similarly when GUI support is enabled, `bitcoin-gui` will spawn a
`bitcoin-node` process, and control it by calling
[`interfaces::Node`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/interfaces/node.h#L63-L64)
methods, and control wallets by calling
[`interface::Wallet`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/interfaces/wallet.h#L52-L53)
methods.

#10102 adds the plumbing that allows gui <-> node <-> wallet cross-process
communication to work transparently, *without changing existing code, only
adding new code*. This is possible because the interfaces in `src/interfaces/`
(`interfaces::Chain`, `interfaces::Node`, `interfaces::Wallet` described above)
are all abstract classes with virtual methods, so different implementations can
be substituted without changes to calling code. This PR adds new implementations
of each interface that forward method calls from one process to another. In
early versions of this PR, adding new implementations of each interface required
adding a lot of boilerplate code. Every method in every interface, and every
argument and return value of every method had to had custom C++ code written
that would handle the method call serialization and forwarding from the calling
process to the called process. For example, the
[`Wallet::encryptWallet`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.19/src/ipc/interfaces.h#L275)
abstract method:

```c++
    virtual bool encryptWallet(const SecureString& wallet_passphrase) = 0;
```

had an
[`ipc::capnp::WalletImpl::encryptWallet`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.19/src/ipc/capnp/interfaces.cpp#L205-L213)
implmentation which forwarded the encrypt call from the gui process to the
wallet process using the [Cap'n Proto RPC
framework](https://capnproto.org/cxxrpc.html):

```c++
    bool encryptWallet(const SecureString& wallet_passphrase) override
    {
        auto call = MakeCall(m_loop, [&]() {
            auto request = m_client.encryptWalletRequest();
            request.setWalletPassphrase(ToArray(wallet_passphrase));
            return request;
        });
        return call.send([&]() { return call.m_response->getResult(); });
    }
```

with corresponding code in an [`ipc::capnp::WalletServer::encryptWallet`
method](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.19/src/ipc/capnp/server.cpp#L102-L107)
in the wallet process to handle the incoming RPC:

```c++
    kj::Promise<void> encryptWallet(EncryptWalletContext context) override
    {
        context.getResults().setResult(
            m_impl->encryptWallet(ToSecureString(context.getParams().getWalletPassphrase())));
        return kj::READY_NOW;
    }
```

by forwarding it to the local [`ipc::local::WalletImpl::encryptWallet`
method](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.19/src/ipc/local/interfaces.cpp#L150-L153):

```c++
    bool encryptWallet(const SecureString& wallet_passphrase) override
    {
        return m_wallet.EncryptWallet(wallet_passphrase);
    }
```

which is the same method that would have been called directly if code were
running in a single process instead of multiple processes.

Because the `ipc::capnp::WalletImpl::encryptWallet` and
`ipc::capnp::WalletServer::encryptWallet` methods above and all similar methods
just contain boilerplate code forwarding arguments and return values, newer
versions of this PR no longer define these methods manually, and instead
generate them automatically. (You can see these methods in generated
`src/ipc/capnp/wallet.capnp.proxy-client.c++` and
`src/ipc/capnp/wallet.capnp.proxy-server.c++` files after building this PR, but
they are not part of the PR source code). The code generation means that adding
a new method or changing an existing method signature now just requires editing
a single line in the interface's
[`.capnp`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/wallet.capnp#L20)
file:

```capnproto
    encryptWallet @1 (context :Proxy.Context, walletPassphrase :Data) -> (result :Bool);
```

and the corresponding forwarding code is generated from that.

Library support for everything described above was merged previously in [#19160
Multiprocess: Add basic spawn and IPC
support](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19160) ([review
club](https://bitcoincore.reviews/19160)), so the most significant part of
#10102 is just adding `.capnp` interfaces for all the interfaces in
[`src/ipc/capnp/`](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/tree/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp).

#10102 is a large PR and it is divided into multiple commits.

- [Update libmultiprocess library](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/0d5a9187f53bd419c8e11a3388d08e690a78f8ec)
- [Add SpanReader ignore method](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/bbb5c054d023fa840dcf57c818a5fb7c0ecaac17)
- [Increase feature_block.py and feature_taproot.py timeouts](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/054909cffdb0c607321f8ef31d551a1d4f680b33)
- [Add capnp serialization code for bitcoin types](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/b5f618f582499e15bd51883a102ad0e58beab033)
- [Add capnp wrapper for Handler interface](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/36ed7095398c4811898aa1c3d3f8d42b63e4b432)
- [Add capnp wrapper for Chain interface](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/b131a8005b41b8bf6866e7c4383f732fc6ddbfe6)
- [Add capnp wrapper for Wallet interface](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/e944743422dda816ece691569602f0a2bb67a1a7)
- [Add capnp wrapper for Node interface](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/8cfe45d5e0f54ce88e5278856b861f02f75af1b8)
- [Make bitcoin-gui spawn a bitcoin-node process](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/11df1f8701f4f693b0c2fbdc0000649a625ec150)
- [Make bitcoin-node spawn a bitcoin-wallet process](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/188de5680348dfb6993d4f8c0a43437eb1436ffd)
- [multiprocess: Add debug.log .wallet/.gui suffixes](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/0f736c1f272c23a9ab1d3c0f915f1ba855c28d32)
- [doc: Multiprocess misc doc and comment updates](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/794ede45a9e2dd685a564fc59e02d26e7287a78a)
- [combine_logs: Handle multiprocess wallet log files](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/8a18a12a23277c64e2af05867607ed4471b1a692)

The most significant commits are the "Add canp serialization..." and "Add capnp
wrapper..." commits which add [Cap'n Proto schema
definitions](https://capnproto.org/language.html) describing Bitcoin's struct
and interface types that are shared between processes:
([common.capnp](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/common.capnp),
[chain.capnp](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/chain.capnp),
[node.capnp](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/node.capnp),
[wallet.capnp](https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/wallet.capnp)).
These commits also add a lot of glue code in `BuildField` / `ReadField`/
`BuildMessage` / `ReadMessage` function. There is a lot of ugly C++ template
syntax needed to declare the function types, but the actual function bodies are
pretty straightforward and just copy information between Bitcoin Core's native
data structures and corresponding capnp messages.

The other two significant commits in this PR are the "Make bitcoin-gui spawn a
bitcoin-node process" commit and "Make bitcoin-node spawn a bitcoin-wallet
process" commit. These commits don't add much new code. Instead they strip out
wallet initialiatation code from the `BitcoinNodeInit` class (so the
`bitcoin-node` process no longer has wallet functionality linked in) and strip
out node and wallet initialization code from the `BitcoinGuiInit` class (so the
`bitcoin-gui` class no longer has node and wallet functionality linked in. Then
they add `spawnProcess` calls in appropriate places to start making
cross-process calls. A good entry point into these two commits is to search for
the new `spawnProcess` calls they add.

The other commits in this PR are needed for completeness but aren't related to
its core functionality. They are smaller and just update dependencies, logging,
and test code.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

2. What are some disadvantages of separating bitcoin node, wallet, and GUI into separate processes?
   What are some benefits?

3. Did you try building with `--enable-multiprocess` ? And did you try running with `debug=1` to
   view IPC logging?

4. Why is it important that Cap'n Proto types and libraries are only accessed in the
   `src/ipc/capnp/` directory, and not in any other public header files?

5. What is the difference between node and wallet running on different processes vs different
   threads? Why must they communicate via an IPC framework instead of calling each other's functions
   normally?

6. Where are the `spawnProcess` calls added in the "Make bitcoin-gui spawn..." and "Make
   bitcoin-node spawn..." commits? What type of interface pointer is requested from each of the
   spawned processes?

<!--TODO logs after meeting
## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <ryanofsky> #startmeeting
17:00 <ryanofsky> Hi!
17:00 <lightlike> hi
17:00 <ryanofsky> Today going to review Multiprocess bitcoin https://bitcoincore.reviews/10102
17:00 <b10c> hi
17:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 <svav> Hi
17:01 <ryanofsky> Hi and first question is the usual who's here and did you did you review the PR? (Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK)
17:02 <lightlike> concept ACK, looked at it but not too much in-depth
17:02 <b10c> I haven't managed to look closer, but concept ACK
17:02 <michaelfolkson> Yeah all the ACKs from me from what I've done so far
17:02 <ryanofsky> Also wondering if there were parts of the description or implementation that could be explained better? Things that were confusing?
17:02 <svav> I read the notes
17:03 <michaelfolkson> I guess this particular PR has been open for years and has hundreds of comments that are hard to read due to GitHub
17:04 <ryanofsky> Yeah, but if people mostly think purpose is clear and top description is clear I'm happy
17:05 <svav> One thing I would say is interfaces::WalletClient  and interface::Wallet are very similarly named, so you don't get any hint of what is different about them.
17:06 <ryanofsky> Right WalletClient is the interface the bitcoin-node uses to control bitcoin-wallet, Walelt is the interface bitcoin-gui uses to control bitcoin-wallet
17:06 <michaelfolkson> Just wasn't clear to me initially whether this was a PR covering the whole project or a prototype or whether it was just one PR in a series
17:06 <michaelfolkson> It is the latter but in that case I don't know how it has been open for years in that case :)
17:07 <ryanofsky> I wonder what a better name for WalletClient might be. Really it only exists for backwards compatability so bitcoin-node will continue to load wallets by default. More ideally bitcoin-wallet would just connect to node, I think
17:08 <ryanofsky> It's not the whole project, or a prototype. It's base cross-process functionality that features can be built on later
17:08 <svav> ryanofsky: I guess what I am saying is from the names, you can't tell that one is for use by the Node, and the other for use by the GUI
17:09 <michaelfolkson> But it needed all the previous PRs in the project to be merged first right? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/projects/10
17:09 <svav> ryanofsky: So, it might be something that could create confusion
17:09 <ryanofsky> svav, do you think interfaces::Wallet is not a good name for the interface used to control a Wallet? It seems to me interfaces::Wallet is a good name, but only WalletClient is the bad name
17:10 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, that's right it has a lot of dependencies that were merged previously
17:11 <ryanofsky> Q2 is What are some disadvantages of separating bitcoin node, wallet, and GUI into separate processes? What are some benefits?
17:11 <michaelfolkson> For what its worth I think the names are fine as well they are well documented (ideally both in the code and in the separate multiprocess doc)
17:12 <michaelfolkson> *as long as they are
17:12 <ryanofsky> That's good, always looking for ideas of better names and things that are missing from docs
17:13 <svav> Well, as a suggestion, you could have interfaces::WalletForNode and interface::WalletForGUI so they are differentiated. I'm just saying at the moment, they both seem very similar.
17:14 <lightlike> i'd say one disadvantage is that it's slower if things get serialized at one process, sent over a socket, deserialized by the another process
17:14 <svav> One disadvantage of separation might be there is more code to maintain.
17:14 <ryanofsky> Thanks svav! Yes ForXXX would be possible convention to use for interface names
17:15 <michaelfolkson> +1
17:15 <ryanofsky> lightlike, yes it adds more code, more dependencies, strictly worse performance
17:15 <michaelfolkson> Lots of work too :)
17:16 <ryanofsky> Well work is in the benefits column for me
17:16 <svav> The advantages as said in the notes are greater resilience, as node fault will not bring down wallet and vice versa.
17:16 <lightlike> advantages: there could be alternative implementations for parts, such as GUI or wallet; separating code like this makes it easier to be sure that parts that should be independent really are
17:17 <ryanofsky> Yeah main thing I like about it is it forces codebase to be more modular, and can let you run a node continuosly and connect wallets and gui instances to it as needed
17:17 <ryanofsky> Q3 Did you try building with `--enable-multiprocess` ? And did you try running with `-debug=1` to view IPC logging?
17:18 <ryanofsky> (and feel free to keep going on Q2 if more to say there)
17:19 <lightlike> yes, building and running on regtest worked fine for me.
17:19 <michaelfolkson> Q3 - Yes I ran on regtest and signet
17:19 <michaelfolkson> I wasn't sure what I'd see. Like should the wallet only communicate the node when the wallet wants to make a transaction or wants to know its balance
17:20 <michaelfolkson> But there was so many log messages it was also hard to see specific logs when you made a specific action
17:21 <michaelfolkson> I think Sjors said that in a comment too
17:21 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, yeah, there is a lot of crosstalk between the processes, especially when you use the GUI
17:22 <ryanofsky> It just shows all the places where gui, node, and wallet are notifying or polling each other
17:22 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, I wonder if this is unexpected, or you see it as a problem
17:23 <ryanofsky> To me purpose of IPC logging is just to debug IPC, but if you want to use it for other things then it could be a problem
17:24 <michaelfolkson> I guess in an idealized world there would be less cross talk and they would only talk when absolutely necessary or when they need something. But in reality we are dealing with Satoshi's inheritance so I'm not sure what the idealized state would be
17:25 <michaelfolkson> A oversimplification would be the wallet only hears from the node say every block? Or if the wallet wants to make a transaction or hasn't figured out the UTXOs it controls
17:26 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, very much agree. I think removing the most egregious polling is probably low hanging fruit for cleanup prs (independent of anything in 10102), and would also be good for improving gui performance
17:27 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, well the wallet also needs to know about every transaction added to the mempool to see if it's relevant
17:28 <michaelfolkson> ryanofsky: Right for zero conf transactions
17:28 <ryanofsky> Exactly, yes
17:29 <michaelfolkson> And the node has to ask the wallet if it is interested in every transaction as the node doesn't know any prior keys, addresses. I guess that's a lot of chatter in itself
17:30 <lightlike> are the objects that are exchanged displayed in Cap'n'Protos serialization format? I see lots of hex code in my logs.
17:30 <ryanofsky> Any object that can be sent in bitcoin's native serialization format is serialized that way, and displayed as hex
17:31 <ryanofsky> UniValue objects are sent as JSON. A few objects that don't have bitcoin serialize methods are serialized as capnproto structs
17:32 <ryanofsky> A good example of the last case is NodeStats https://github.com/ryanofsky/bitcoin/blob/pr/ipc.168/src/ipc/capnp/node.capnp#L139
17:33 <ryanofsky> Q4 is semirelated
17:33 <ryanofsky> Q4 Why is it important that Cap'n Proto types and libraries are only accessed in the `src/ipc/capnp/` directory, and not in any other public header files?
17:35 <michaelfolkson> Don't know... so it doesn't impact non-multiprocess users?
17:35 <lightlike> 1) its better to keep it in one place so we can easily add alternatives to capnproto, 2) to be able to still build bitcoind without having capnproto installed
17:37 <ryanofsky> Yes to both. Goal is to make it possible to run without multiprocess code, and make the dependency confined and easier to replace if needed
17:38 <ryanofsky> Q5 What is the difference between node and wallet running on different processes vs different threads? Why must they communicate via an IPC framework instead of calling each other's functions normally?
17:38 <lightlike> are there plans of moving towards multi-process only in the long term?
17:40 <michaelfolkson> That would require https://github.com/chaincodelabs/libmultiprocess in the Core repo right?
17:40 <ryanofsky> What would advantages / disadvantages be?
17:41 <michaelfolkson> So threads run in shared memory space whereas processes run in separate memory spaces https://stackoverflow.com/questions/200469/what-is-the-difference-between-a-process-and-a-thread
17:41 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, that's probably true, but I think kind of a project management question more than a technical one
17:41 <lightlike> Maybe it reduces code complexity not to have to maintain code for both options? But I'm not sure about specifics.
17:41 <ryanofsky> lightlike, yeah I think that's the way I see it
17:42 <michaelfolkson> If there are trade-offs you kinda need to support both
17:42 <ryanofsky> No reason to require multiprocess unless you are really going to separate code into different projects
17:43 <lightlike> But I guess if the loss of performance is significant, it's not really an option anyway?
17:43 <ryanofsky> Right I'm also assuming supporting multiprocess + single process with everything in one repo is not more work than just supporting multiprocess
17:44 <michaelfolkson> For the security benefits of separation you want separate processes rather than separate threads
17:44 <svav> If you have multi-process, why do you have to keep single process?
17:44 <lightlike> did you try IBD with multiprocess and compare the performance?
17:45 <ryanofsky> lightlike, that would be a good experiment. I think there should be no change in performance really unless the wallet is somehow slowing down IBD
17:45 <michaelfolkson> Have to add Core multiprocess to Jameson Lopp's node performance reviews :)
17:46 <ryanofsky> svav, you don't have to keep single process, but dropping support for single process removes very little code
17:46 <michaelfolkson> https://blog.lopp.net/2020-bitcoin-node-performance-tests/
17:46 <ryanofsky> 10102 almost strictly adds code and changes very little existing code
17:48 <michaelfolkson> svav: If users like the trade-offs offered by single process rather than multiprocess you shouldn't take it away (assuming the trade-offs are significant)
17:48 <ryanofsky> In general on performance, I think most of the loss is caused by unnecessary cross talk, not necessary overhead
17:48 <lightlike> if not IBD, are there any specific things/user actions where you would expect a notable performance loss?
17:49 <ryanofsky> lightlike, that's a good question. I guess I'd expect performance loss in random weird places
17:50 <ryanofsky> Especially the GUI does a lot of weird things querying a lot of unnecessary information from the wallet
17:50 <ryanofsky> I wouldn't be surprised if IBD was slow, or if some other random thing was slow
17:52 <ryanofsky> Q6 is a code question
17:52 <ryanofsky> Q6 Where are the `spawnProcess` calls added in the "Make bitcoin-gui spawn..." and "Make bitcoin-node spawn..." commits? What type of interface pointer is requested from each of the spawned processes?
17:53 <ryanofsky> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10102/commits/11df1f8701f4f693b0c2fbdc0000649a625ec150
17:53 <ryanofsky> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10102/commits/188de5680348dfb6993d4f8c0a43437eb1436ffd
17:54 <lightlike> wallet/init.cpp the wallet is spawned when it didn't already exist
17:54 <ryanofsky> lightlike, yes exactly
17:54 <lightlike> I think the requested pointer is std::unique_ptr<interfaces::Init>
17:54 <ryanofsky> Yes!
17:55 <lightlike> will that wallet init code try something if we compile without a wallet?
17:55 <ryanofsky> If you are running `bitcoind` executable `auto wallet_client = node.init->makeWalletClient(*node.chain);` is not null, so no need to call spawnProcess
17:56 <ryanofsky> lightlike, if compiled with --disable-wallet, this code isn't compiled at all, and src/dummywallet.cpp is used instead
17:56 <lightlike> ah, thanks!
17:56 <michaelfolkson> So --enable-multiprocess and --disable-wallet configure options
17:56 <ryanofsky> If you are running `bitcoin-node` `wallet_client` is null, so call to spawnProcess is made instead
17:57 <ryanofsky> The idea is bitcoind has wallet code linked in, doesn't need to spawn anything. bitcoin-node doesn't have wallet code linked in so needs to spawn a bitcoin-wallet process
17:58 <ryanofsky> Regardless of which happens, the node code calls wallet code with an interfaces::WalletClient pointer
17:58 <ryanofsky> But in one case the calls do IPC communicate, in the other case IPC is skipped and everything happen locally
18:00 <lightlike> That makes sense!
18:00 <ryanofsky> Hours up but feel free to ask me any questions. I learned I need to actually do something about the WalletClient name (this complaint has been made before!)
18:01 <lightlike> thanks ryanofsky, that was really interesting!
18:01 <ryanofsky> Thanks you for putting in work to understand this and bringing up great points!
18:02 <svav> Thanks ryanofsky and all
18:02 <ryanofsky> Maybe WalletLoader would be a good name instead of WalletClient...
18:03 <michaelfolkson> One final question. Could you re-introduce non security critical shared state between the wallet and node just for say addresses that the wallet is tracking? To reduce the chatter?
18:04 <michaelfolkson> I get it is going back in the opposite direction (!) but just wondering if there is a grey area that is optimal
18:04 <ryanofsky> michaelfolkson, yes that would be possible and it could reduce amount of traffic substantially
18:04 <lightlike> michaelfolkson: you mean as an alternative way enabled only for non-multiprocess builds? wouldn't otherwise the multiprocess build be impossible?
18:05 <ryanofsky> lightlike, probably you would only do this for multiprocess builds and leave single process case alone
18:06 <michaelfolkson> Would a multiprocess build with some limited shared state between multiple processes be impossible?
18:06 <ryanofsky> wallet code would tell node code what addresses it cares about
18:07 <lightlike> isn't one idea of the mulitprocess build that it could also apply in situations where sharing state in other ways would be physically impossible (like different processes running on different computers)?
18:07 <michaelfolkson> The shared state could be stored on both machines?!
18:07 <ryanofsky> Easiest way to implement shared state would be to have it reside inside the bitcoin-node process. Of course it would be technically possible to have it somewhere else too though
18:08 <ryanofsky> lightlike, I think I'm just talking about "shared state" at a high level, like what information each process knows about. Not shared memory literally
18:09 <lightlike> oh ok, understood, i thought about shared memory.
18:10 <ryanofsky> Yeah, I would avoid using shared memory / shared files by default unless there was some big advantage to using that because it adds many limitations
18:13 <michaelfolkson> The wallet can't do anything without the node so it is not like the wallet process can continue doing useful stuff if the node goes down. So the wallet giving the node a bit of extra information that isn't strictly node information could make sense
18:13 <michaelfolkson> Anyway, really interesting. Many thanks ryanofsky (for all your work on this)
18:14 <ryanofsky> Thank you!
18:15 <michaelfolkson> There's some interesting process rearchitecture going on in c-lightning too. I'm also struggling to understand that :)
18:15 <michaelfolkson> https://btctranscripts.com/c-lightning/2021-11-29-developer-call/#rearchitecting-c-lightning-daemons
18:18 <ryanofsky> Thanks for pointers, interesting to know about ibd and clightning stuff
18:19 <michaelfolkson> Although that is daemons vs processes
18:19 * michaelfolkson looks up definitions
18:19 <sipa> a daemon is a background process
18:19 <sipa> the "d" in bitcoind stands for daemon
18:20 <michaelfolkson> Right but the foreground, background thing isn't clear to me
18:20 <sipa> like: you don't see it running
18:21 <sipa> you start it, it keeps running in the background
18:21 <sipa> but it doesn't show a GUI, or occupy your terminal
18:23 <lightlike> a bit weird though that bitcoind needs an additional "-daemon" argument in order to actually be a daemon :)
18:23 <sipa> True!
18:23 <michaelfolkson> Ha
18:48 <ryanofsky> FWIW, made pr to rename WalletClient https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/23842
{% endirc %}
