---
layout: pr
date: 2021-04-07
title: Introduce node rebroadcast module
pr: 21061
authors: [amitiuttarwar]
components: ["p2p"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: 038f751
---

## Notes

* Hiding links between wallet addresses and IP addresses is a key part of
  Bitcoin privacy. Many techniques exist to help users obfuscate their IP
  address when submitting their own transactions, and various P2P changes have
  been proposed with the goal of hiding transaction origins.

* Beyond initial broadcast, _rebroadcast_ behavior can also leak information. If
  a node rebroadcasts its own wallet transactions differently from transactions
  received from its peers, adversaries can use this information to infer
  transaction origins even if the initial broadcast revealed nothing. We have
  discussed rebroadcast in previous review clubs,
  [#16698](https://bitcoincore.reviews/16698) and
  [#18038](https://bitcoincore.reviews/18038).

* The rebroadcast project's goal is to improve privacy by making node
  rebroadcast behavior for wallet transactions indistinguishable from that of
  other peers' transactions.

* [#21061](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21061) adds a `TxRebroadcast`
  module responsible for selecting transactions to be rebroadcast and keeping
  track of how many times each transaction has been rebroadcast.  After each
  block, the module uses the miner and other heuristics to select transactions
  from the mempool that it believes "should" have been included in the block and
  reannounces them (disabled by default for now).

* Rebroadcasts happen once per new block. The set of transactions to be
  rebroadcast is calculated as follows:

    - The node regularly estimates the minimum feerate for transactions to be
      included in the next block, `m_cached_fee_rate`.

    - When a new block arrives, the transactions included in the block are
      removed from the mempool. The node then uses `BlockAssembler` to calculate
      which transactions (with a total weight up to 3/4 of the block maximum)
      from the mempool are more than 30 minutes old and have a minimum feerate
      of `m_cached_fee_rate`. This results in a set of transactions that our
      node would have included in the last block.

    - The rebroadcast attempt tracker, `m_attempt_tracker`, tracks how many
      times and how recently we've attempted to rebroadcast a transaction so
      that we don't spam the network with re-announcements.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. In what scenarios might a user want to rebroadcast their transaction? Why
   shouldn't each wallet just be solely responsible for rebroadcasting its own
   transactions?

3. How does the rebroadcast module decide which transactions to rebroadcast
   (`TxRebroadcastHandler::GetRebroadcastTransactions()`)?

4. In what scenarios would a miner include different transactions from our
   `BlockAssembler`? More specifically, when might the miner exclude a
   transaction, and when might it include a transaction yours doesn't?

5. Why might we want to keep a transaction in our rebroadcast attempt tracker
   even after removing it from our mempool?  (Hint: what happens if we expire a
   transaction from our mempool and then our peer rebroadcasts it to us? When
   might this happen?)

6. When should we remove transactions from our rebroadcast attempt tracker? How
   does the code ensure that the tracker doesn't grow unbounded?

7. How is the estimated minimum feerate for inclusion in a block,
   `m_cached_fee_rate`, calculated? Why not just calculate the feerate of the
   lowest-feerate transaction in the most recently mined block?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
19:00 <jnewbery> hi!
19:00 <_0x0ff> hi
19:00 <b10c> hi
19:00 <schmidty> hi!
19:00 <ccdle12> hi
19:00 <emzy> hi
19:00 <glozow> Hey everybody! Welcome to PR Review Club :D
19:00 <stickrobot> first time here
19:00 <svav> hi
19:00 <amiti> hi
19:00 <glozow> Today we're looking at #21061, introduce rebroadcast module
19:00 <ecola> hi
19:00 <lightlike> hi
19:00 <glozow> Notes and questions: https://bitcoincore.reviews/21061
19:00 <glozow> Welcome stickrobot!
19:00 <glozow> any other first timers?
19:00 <jnewbery> hi stickrobot. Welcome!
19:00 <_0x0ff> welcome stickrobot
19:01 <stickrobot> thanks all
19:01 <glozow> Have y'all had a chance to review the PR? y/n
19:01 <b10c> y
19:01 <ccdle12> n :(
19:01 <_0x0ff> y
19:01 <emzy> n
19:01 <stickrobot> n
19:01 <ivanacostarubio> n :(
19:01 <svav> y
19:02 <jnewbery> y
19:02 <lightlike> y
19:02 <glozow> Would someone like to summarize what the PR is doing for those who haven't had a chance to review it? :)
19:03 <sishir> All nodes (instead of wallet) will rebroadcast tx that should have bee confirmed by now
19:03 <svav> It is increasing security by changing rebroadcast message contents, so IP address cannot be linked with wallet address
19:03 <sishir> *been
19:03 <glozow> sishir: svav: yes! updating rebroadcast for the sake of improving privacy
19:03 <glozow> okay let's start with some conceptual questions. In what scenarios might a user want to rebroadcast their transaction? Why
19:03 <glozow> shouldn't each wallet just be solely responsible for rebroadcasting its own
19:03 <glozow> transactions?
19:04 <b10c> When his tx didn't propagate properly or he assumes that the network has forgotten about it
19:04 <sishir> nah cause there is privacy leak when they try to rebroadcast
19:04 <svav> Will rebroadcast if a node thinks transaction should have been processed but wasn't
19:05 <cls> rebroadcast opens one up to privacy leakage
19:05 <b10c> and the user's wallet might not always be online to rebroadcast
19:05 <glozow> b10c: correct, sometimes tx propagation just doesn't work properly. why would the network forget about a tx that was once in their mempools?
19:05 <sishir> Q. Why do nodes only ever rebroadcast acast their own tx tho?
19:06 <sishir> *rebroadcast
19:06 <glozow> sishir: svav: cls: b10c: yes! what can a spy node do to deanon transactions?
19:06 <glozow> sishir: that's just what the legacy behavior is
19:06 <sishir> spy node can infer that the node is the source wallet and execute dust attack
19:06 <svav> A spy node can compare rebroadcasts from all nodes and identify differences, thus associate an IP address with a wallet address
19:07 <_0x0ff> sishir: new implementation rebroadcasts any transaction not just their own
19:07 <glozow> sorry just to clarify, i mean what can a spy node do right now, assuming nodes don't have the changes from this PR
19:07 <b10c> transactions expire after 14 days, can get size-limited if more higher fee trasnactions are there - or can be removed in a block which is later reorged (the reorged chain does not contain the transaction)
19:07 <_0x0ff> associate an address with an ip
19:07 <cls> I believe an adversary will be able to link transaction to a users wallet/publick address
19:07 <glozow> b10c: yes exactly
19:08 <sishir> glozow _0x0ff I see Thank you
19:08 <glozow> yep, with current rebroadcast behavior, any node that announces a tx more than once -> the tx is from their wallet
19:09 <amiti> sishir: you mentioned dust attack, can you describe the attack?
19:09 <jnewbery> sishir: A dust attack is something different. It doesn't require knowing the target's network address
19:09 <glozow> ok cool! let's dive into the PR. How does the rebroadcast module decide which transactions to rebroadcast
19:09 <glozow> (`TxRebroadcastHandler::GetRebroadcastTransactions()`)?
19:10 <_0x0ff> It rebrodcasts tx that are: older than 30min, txfee > m_cached_fee_rate (calcualted via BlockAssembler), hasnt been rebroadcasted >= MAX_REBROADCAST_COUNT (6) and wasn't rebroadcasted in the last MIN_REATTEMPT_INTERVAL (4h).
19:10 <glozow> Code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21061/files#diff-7dff50848db96bdb8edffc4d21daeca6d9050ec0e67d96072780ea5751e7df06R33
19:10 <svav> A dusting attack is an attack in which a trace amount of cryptocurrency, called dust, is sent to a large number of wallet addresses with the purpose of "un-masking" or de-anonymizing the addresses. Dusting attacks are tactics utilized by both criminals and law enforcement agencies.
19:10 <glozow> _0x0ff: yes! very prepared :D
19:10 <sishir> Yessir! Dust attack is when attacker sends some btc (dusts) to various addresses and observes the wallet rebroadcasting behavior
19:11 <glozow> is it possible for `GetRebroadcastTransactions` to return 0 transactions?
19:11 <_0x0ff> glozow: hehe, i try ;P
19:11 <glozow> also, is it possible for `GetRebroadcastTransactions` to return more than a block's worth of transactions?
19:11 <_0x0ff> it is i possible to return 0 txs from what I gather, eg when mempool is empty
19:12 <glozow> not just when the mempool is empty! :)
19:12 <_0x0ff> but it's not possible to return then that a more txs that would fit the block, i think it only returns 3/4th of txs that fit the block
19:12 <b10c> more than a block's worth is not possible
19:12 <glozow> _0x0ff: b10c: correct, it would never return more than 3/4 of the maximum block weight
19:13 <_0x0ff> what is the other case that would return 0 txs?
19:13 <glozow> it could return fewer though, if the mempool just doesn't have many transactions that fit the criteria _0x0ff mentioned
19:13 <glozow> the filters are applied within the assembler
19:14 <glozow> does that make sense?
19:14 <_0x0ff> yup
19:14 <glozow> coolio
19:14 <cls> yes, nice explaination
19:14 <glozow> Moving on: In what scenarios would a miner include different transactions from our
19:14 <glozow> `BlockAssembler`? More specifically, when might the miner exclude a
19:14 <glozow> transaction, and when might it include a transaction yours doesn't?
19:14 <glozow> I can think of 3 in each category :)
19:15 <b10c> 1. a transaction didn't propagte to us or the miner yet
19:15 <_0x0ff> If the scenario when miner prioritizes different transactions from ours.
19:15 <marqusat> When a given tx does not reach a miner before they start mining the block or when they censor some transactions.
19:15 <b10c> 2. the miner manually prioritized the transaction
19:15 <b10c> 3. we and the miner have a conflicting transaction in our mempools
19:15 <_0x0ff> miner could also censor a tx
19:15 <b10c> 4. one party has a RBF replacement transaction which the other party doesn't have yet (similar to 1. and 3.)
19:15 <b10c> 5. the miner mines an emtpy block
19:15 <b10c> 6. censorship
19:15 <glozow> yaaaas all good answers
19:16 <cls> minor does not prioritize due to low transaction fee
19:16 <_0x0ff> good answers b10c :)
19:17 <amiti> here's a scenario where the filters wouldn't return any txns to rebroadcast: at time 0, the fee rate cache runs, identifies min fee rate. at time 1 a block comes in and picks up all our mempool txns above this fee rate. when we go to connect the tip, we don't have any remaining txns above the calculated min fee rate.
19:17 <b10c> amiti: good point
19:17 <_0x0ff> ha, good one
19:18 <glozow> amiti: right. and all the high-fee transactions that might have arrived in the meantime would not meet the 30 minute recency filter
19:18 <amiti> glozow: yeah, good point :)
19:19 <glozow> Ok! so what does the rebroadcast attempt tracker do?
19:20 <sishir> keeps track of the # of rebroadcast attempt
19:20 <_0x0ff> it tracks how many times we've rebroadcasted a tx and what was the last time we rebrodcasted it
19:20 <svav> tracks how many times and how recently we’ve attempted to rebroadcast a transaction so that we don’t spam the network with re-announcements.
19:20 <glozow> awesome, yes, svav: nice wording
19:21 <glozow> And Why might we want to keep a transaction in our rebroadcast attempt tracker even after removing it from our mempool?
19:21 <_0x0ff> and it prevents that network doesnt ddos itself with rebroadcasts
19:21 <glozow> Hint: what happens if we expire a transaction from our mempool and then our peer rebroadcasts it to us? When might this happen?
19:22 <_0x0ff> no clue about this one
19:22 <glozow> This part was really confusing for me - feel free to guess and ask questions
19:22 <sishir> I thought we remove them
19:23 <_0x0ff> well, i dont see a reason why deal with removing the tx given it will get expired or removed (when 500 limit is reached)
19:23 <glozow> mempool expiry is 2 weeks, while the attempt tracker expiry is ~3 months. why aren't they the same? -> there must be some reasons why we'd keep a tx in the attempt tracker after the mempool has forgotten about them
19:23 <cls> Each node may have a different state in a decentralized network
19:23 <_0x0ff> oh, if fees get high, and some txs get removed from mempool
19:24 <glozow> _0x0ff: after you remove from mempool, what happens if i rebroadcast to you?
19:24 <_0x0ff> hm but no, the BlockAssembler only gets txs from mempool
19:24 <_0x0ff> it will be added back to mempool
19:24 <glozow> (i still have the tx for whatever reason)
19:24 <glozow> sure, it gets added back to mempool
19:24 <svav> A peer might have a lower minimum fee rate that us, so they won't exclude it like us
19:24 <glozow> is it possible this transaction will _never_ get mined?
19:24 <glozow> can it be consensus-invalid? or policy-invalid?
19:25 <glozow> beyond just fees
19:25 <larryruane_> no because in that case it wouldn't have entered the mempool in the first place
19:25 <glozow> larryruane_: is it possible that the rest of the network has policy rules that we don't know about?
19:26 <glozow> let's say we're version 22 nodes with rebroadcast implemented
19:26 <b10c> not consensus invalid - but policy-invalid can happen if we don't support e.g. a softfork
19:26 <glozow> version 24 nodes have a new policy for version 2 witnesses, for example
19:26 <b10c> wait  can it be consensus invalid?
19:26 <glozow> b10c: are there nodes right now that don't know about some consensus rules? :)
19:27 <b10c> sure, I there are nodes that don't know about e.g SegWit
19:27 <glozow> b10c: exactly
19:27 <b10c> I think e.g. forkmonitor runs a 0.10.x Bitcoin Core node
19:28 <glozow> heh. so, what happens if there are nodes rebroadcasting transactions that don't meet new consensus rules?
19:30 <b10c> hm
19:30 <b10c> not sure
19:30 <_0x0ff> same, no idea
19:30 <jnewbery> let's try to figure it out!
19:30 <glozow> b10c: what will updated nodes do? (the ones that know about the new consensus rules)
19:30 <glozow> and _0x0ff
19:30 <b10c> reject the transaction
19:31 <glozow> b10c: correct
19:31 <glozow> and what will old nodes do?
19:31 <_0x0ff> accept it, and keep on rebroadcasting the tx
19:31 <glozow> _0x0ff: correct!
19:31 <glozow> so what happens if 2 of these old nodes are connected to each other?
19:32 <_0x0ff> they will keep sending the tx between each other so it will never expire (until expiry conditions are met)
19:32 <glozow> _0x0ff: correct
19:32 <b10c> need to be more than 2 nodes with the current filter, right?
19:32 <glozow> let's say the tx is removed from the rebroadcast attempt tracker as soon as it expires from mempool
19:32 <b10c> 4h * 4 attempts < 14 days
19:33 <glozow> will these 2 nodes ever forget about the tx?
19:33 <sipa_> the last time a consensus rule change was introduced that changed something that wasn't already very widespread nonstandard was BIP113 i believe
19:33 <sipa_> (just to give some context)
19:33 <glozow> sipa_: right. i think this applies to new policy changes as well, though
19:33 <sipa_> glozow: it does
19:34 <sipa_> though i'm not sure when the last time was that policy was restricted
19:34 <b10c> fwiw: BIP 113: Median time-past as endpoint for lock-time calculations https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0113.mediawiki
19:36 <glozow> soooo, should we remove a tx from rebroadcast attempt tracker as soon as we remove it from mempool?
19:37 <b10c> based on your question I don't think the 2 nodes would ever forget about the tx, but tbh my train of though got a bit lost
19:37 <sishir> wait so the nodes will not forget about the tx?
19:37 <sishir> im a lil confused
19:37 <b10c> glozow: no
19:37 <svav> glozow: no
19:37 <_0x0ff> no, we shouldnt remove it - so the tx woudl get expired faster
19:37 <b10c> never* ^
19:38 <glozow> b10c: svav: _0x0ff: correcto
19:38 <sishir> isn't the tx already confirmed, mined and in the blockchain? So, we still want to keep a copy of it in rebroadcast attempt?
19:39 <jnewbery> sishir: imagine both node A and node B have not upgraded and both consider the tx valid. If there's no way to prevent rebroadcasting, they'll just continue to rebroadcast the tx to each other.
19:39 <lightlike> though if you send >500 of these txes, they would still never forget even with the tracker, so I'm thinking the tracker only helps when this unintentional, not in an attack case or does it?
19:39 <jnewbery> sishir: this is only for unconfirmed transactions.
19:39 <_0x0ff> besides the the limit (how old tx we keep) in m_attempt_tracker there's also a size limit of 500
19:39 <sishir> Ahhh i see
19:40 <svav> You need to keep it in your rebroadcast attempt tracker so you don't rebroadcast it too many times
19:40 <glozow> lightlike: yeah, but i think you could get old nodes to keep talking about newly invalid transactions regardless
19:41 <glozow> svav: right, so let's see how the 3month expiry helps. let's say you expire a tx from mempool after 2 weeks, and you keep it in your rebroadcast attempt tracker. what happens if you see the tx again?
19:42 <glozow> (let's assume you don't exceed the 500 limit in this situation)
19:43 <svav> You would only rebroadcast it a maximum of 6 times within the 3 months
19:44 <_0x0ff> it will folow the same rules as it did before it got removed, which means we might not rebroadcast it immidiatelly after receiving it (if conditions for rebrodcasting arent met)
19:44 <glozow> svav: yup! so assuming the 2 old nodes keep it in their rebroadcast attempt trackers for 3 months, will they eventually forget about the tx?
19:45 <_0x0ff> yes :)
19:45 <glozow> _0x0ff: :)
19:45 <svav> yes when they have each rebroadcasted it 6 times
19:45 <glozow> svav: correct, after 6 times each
19:46 <glozow> so this helps, as long as they don't reach the 500 maximum
19:46 <glozow> amiti: have you considered increasing the limit? or keeping a separate tracker for expired-from-mempool transactions?
19:47 <amiti> glozow: yeah the limit is slightly arbitrary right now, just to pick a starting point. I think the most relevant will be observing the mechanism out in the wild & seeing if this limit is useful
19:47 <glozow> hopefully we feel comfortable moving to the next question? In general, when should we remove transactions from our rebroadcast attempt tracker?
19:47 <_0x0ff> i also saw a comment about persisting m_attempt_tracker to disk - do we think that's worthy to have?
19:47 <glozow> amiti: makes sense to me
19:47 <amiti> also, if the network is working as expected, we shouldn't be rebroadcasting txns heavily
19:48 <b10c> amiti: especially if many nodes rebroadcast with this patch
19:48 <amiti> =P
19:50 <jnewbery> another potential change could be to move the txids into a rolling filter if they reach MAX_REBROADCAST_COUNT, since at that point we only need a test for inclusion
19:50 <sishir> I  conflicting tx in the block & tx that gets taken out of mempool cause of RBF
19:50 <glozow> sishir: yeah, those are good ones
19:50 <cls> might be worth looking a dynamic algorithms such as TCP retransmission which slowly degrades over time
19:51 <glozow> jnewbery: ooooooh
19:51 <glozow> or a cuckoo cache 🐦
19:52 <amiti> jnewbery: are you suggesting replace attempt tracker with rolling bloom filter? or having an additional?
19:52 <glozow> anyone else have ideas for when we should remove from rebroadcast attempt tracker?
19:52 <amiti> cls: yeah I considered that sort of design, but it feels overkill for the use case
19:52 <jnewbery> potentially having an additional, but I'm just throwing an idea out. It might not be good!
19:52 <svav> when it's confirmed?
19:53 <amiti> jnewbery: gotcha :)
19:53 <glozow> svav: yep! that's a big one
19:53 <svav> when it expires?
19:53 <cls> amiti: totally makes sense
19:53 <glozow> are there any other cases, beyond seeing a conflict in a block, where the tx is guaranteed to be invalid?
19:54 <glozow> svav: expires from where?
19:54 <sipa_> glozow: did you know there is an awesome way of combing cuckoo tables with (tolling) bloom filters? :)
19:54 <sipa_> *fombining
19:54 <glozow> glozow: whaaaa?!
19:54 <glozow> sipa_*
19:54 <sipa_> **combining
19:54 <glozow> HAH i tagged myself 😂
19:54 <sipa_> look up cuckoo filter
19:55 <sishir> gotta head out but thank you glozow. learned a lot
19:56 <sipa_> i did some work on creating an efficient rolling cuckoo filter, but put it aside with a bit higher priority things
19:56 <glozow> sishir: thanks for coming!
19:56 <glozow> sipa_ greatest crossover event
19:57 <glozow> ok I think we have time to do part of the last question: How is the estimated minimum feerate for inclusion in a block, `m_cached_fee_rate`, calculated?
19:57 <_0x0ff> It uses `BlockAssembler::minTxFeeRate()` which calculates a min fee that would still be included in the next mined block. This approach is better because it calculates fees based on the future mintxfee and not the past.
19:57 <svav> Is it something to do with MAX_ENTRY_AGE???
19:58 <glozow> _0x0ff: correct, assemble a block and get the min fee
19:58 <glozow> when do we do this?
19:59 <glozow> svav: er, i don't think?
19:59 <svav> glozow: Sorry, this was in relation to the previous question, but we can move on
19:59 <glozow> svav: okie gotcha
20:00 <glozow> soooo we calculate `m_cached_fee_rate` every 1 minute
20:00 <glozow> that's all we have time for heh
20:00 <glozow> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
