---
layout: pr
date: 2021-03-24
title: "Introduce deploymentstatus"
pr: 19438
authors: [ajtowns]
components: ["consensus"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: e72e062
---

## Notes

- A _soft fork_ is a forwards-compatible change to the Bitcoin consensus rules.
  Any block or transaction that was invalid for nodes that don't implement the
  new soft fork rules will be invalid for nodes that _do_ implement the soft
  fork rules.

- There have been many consensus changes in Bitcoin's 12 year history. A [BitMEX
  research blog post](https://blog.bitmex.com/bitcoins-consensus-forks/) lists
  those consensus changes.

- Changing Bitcoin's consensus rules requires coordination across a decentralized
  network. We want as close as possible to 100% of economic nodes to
  start enforcing the new consensus rules and as close as possible to 100% of
  miners to be mining valid blocks according to the new consensus rules.

- There have been several different methods to coordinate these changes to the
  consensus rules:

  - Flag Day upgrades were used to activate early consensus rules changes.
    Developers simply chose a time after which the new rules would be enforced.

  - IsSuperMajority was used for three changes to the consensus rules between
    2012 and 2015. This activation method is described in
    [BIP34](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0034.mediawiki#specification).

  - Version Bits was used to activate two changes to the consensus rules between
    2015 and 2017. The method is described in
    [BIP9](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0009.mediawiki).

  The [Optech Soft Fork Activation topic page](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/soft-fork-activation)
  provides an excellent summary of the history of activation methods.

- Once a change to the consensus rules has been activated and buried under many
  months or years of work, the soft fork activation height is established fact.
  We assume that a competing fork of the chain will not re-org back to before the
  activation and change the activation height.

- At that point, the exact method of activation is no longer interesting, and
  any logic in the node that enforces that activation method is technical debt.
  We can hard code the activation height into the node's logic. This is called
  "burying" the deployment method, and is documented in
  [BIP90](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0090.mediawiki).

- [Bitcoin Core PR8391](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8391) buried
  the IsSuperMajority soft fork deployments (BIP34, BIP65, and BIP66).
  [PR16060](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16060) later buried the
  version bits soft fork deployments (CLTV and segwit).

- Both of those PRs required changing multiple code paths in the validation
  logic. In a [review
  comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11398#issuecomment-335599326),
  Pieter Wuille suggested abstracting out the difference between a soft fork
  activation and a buried deployment, so that burying deployments in future wouldn't
  require so many changes to different code paths.

- This PR does exactly that, by introducing
  `Deployment{ActiveAfter|ActiveAt|Enabled}` functions that are defined for both
  version bits deployments and buried deployments.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. How many buried deployments are there? Where are they listed in the code?

3. How many version bits deployments are there? Where are they listed in the code?

4. What are the advantages of using a buried deployment instead of a
   version bits deployment?

5. Since C++11, we generally prefer to use [scoped
   enumerations](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/enum#Scoped_enumerations).
   What are the advantages of using scoped enums? Are they used in this PR? Why?

6. What is `DeploymentEnabled()` used for? Can it ever return `false` for a
   buried deployment?

7. What is the version bits cache used for?

8. If the taproot soft fork is activated, and sometime later we want to bury
   that activation method, what changes need to be made to the code?

9. If you wanted to revert segwit to a version bits deployment, what
   changes would you need to make to the code? Why might you want to
   do that?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
18:00 <jnewbery> #startmeeting
18:00 <maqusat> hi
18:00 <amiti> hi
18:00 <glozow> happy 100th meeting!
18:00 <b10c> hi
18:00 <Murch> hello
18:00 <prayank> hi
18:01 <jnewbery> happy 100 everybody!
18:01 <schmidty> hi
18:01 <genef> hi
18:01 <michaelfolkson> hi
18:01 <gniemeyer> woooo
18:01 <amiti> WOW... thats wild!!
18:01 <ivanacostarubio> hello... happy 100th!
18:01 <ember_> wow 100
18:01 <emzy> hi
18:02 <michaelfolkson> Time to bury the first 50 PR review clubs?
18:02 <jnewbery> oooh maybe we're at 101 actually
18:02 <b10c> 💯
18:02 <jnewbery> whatever it is, welcome!
18:02 <glozow> 😱
18:02 <jnewbery> anyone here for the first time?
18:02 <sugarjig> Me!
18:02 <jnewbery> sugarjig: welcome!
18:02 <genef> 2nd time, still count?
18:03 <sugarjig> Thanks!
18:03 <jnewbery> glad you could join us
18:03 <alteralteregoism> It's my first time here.
18:03 <glozow> genef: welcome, first time being a returning review clubbie!
18:03 <genef> :)
18:03 <jnewbery> 2nd time doesn't count as first time. We call that an off-by-one bug
18:03 <ember_> welcome alteralteregoism
18:04 <gniemeyer> jnewberry: my first time
18:04 <b10c> welcome sugarjig alteralteregoism and gniemeyer!
18:04 <jnewbery> ok, couple of hints if it's your first time, and reminders if it's not: all questions are welcome! Everyone is here to learn.
18:04 <jnewbery> and 2: you don't have to ask to ask. If you have a question, just go right ahead and ask.
18:04 <jnewbery> more tips here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/your-first-meeting
18:05 <jnewbery> ok, who had time to review the PR this week? (y/n)
18:05 <genef> y
18:05 <amiti> 0.5y
18:05 <glozow> 0.8y
18:05 <ccdle12> y
18:05 <b10c> y
18:05 <emzy> n
18:05 <gniemeyer> n
18:05 <michaelfolkson> y
18:05 <ivanacostarubio> n
18:05 <schmidty> n
18:05 <sugarjig> 0.5y
18:05 <ember_> y
18:05 <maqusat> just had time to glance over the diff
18:06 <maqusat> .5y
18:06 <jnewbery> great. That's a lot of reviewers!
18:06 <jnewbery> First question: Did you review the PR? Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK? What was your review approach?
18:06 <maqusat> Concept ACK
18:07 <genef> reviewed, ACK. manual code review, no test
18:07 <ember_> Concept ACK
18:07 <ccdle12> concept ack
18:07 <Murch> n
18:07 <michaelfolkson> Concept ACK, Approach ACK. Read the links in the PR review club notes and then looked at the code. Didn't test
18:07 <jnewbery> does anyone want to give a short summary of the motivation?
18:07 <amiti> approach ACK ! I think its a clever way to make it simple to bury deployments & the way the enums / functions are defined provide some safety around accidentally mixing them up
18:08 <michaelfolkson> jnewbery: As you said in your notes we don't care how a soft fork was activated a long time after it has activated. "Technical debt"
18:09 <b10c> we want to make future softfork buries a small-as-possible code change
18:09 <glozow> yes we like to bury deployments, this PR is refactoring to make burying simpler
18:09 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: right, that's the motivation for "burying" a deployment. This PR isn't burying any new deployments. What's it doing?
18:09 <ccdle12> it looks it provides a common interface for the code to switch on code paths according to predefined enums for certain softfork activations
18:09 <jnewbery> b10c glozow: exactly!
18:09 <jnewbery> ccdle12: yes
18:10 <jnewbery> let's get a bit more concrete
18:10 <michaelfolkson> Oh sure adding some helper functions to make it easier to bury future deployments
18:10 <jnewbery> How many ‘buried deployments’ are there? Where are they listed in the code?
18:10 <ivanacostarubio> easier way to deal with tecnical debt about burying deployments
18:10 <ccdle12> maybe 7-8?
18:10 <glozow> I counted 5: height in coinbase, CLTV, DER sigs, CSV, and segwit. They're in src/consensus/params.h.
18:11 <jnewbery> glozow: yus!
18:11 <jnewbery> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/consensus/params.h#L14-L22
18:12 <jnewbery> A nice thing about this PR is that they're all enumerated now
18:12 <amiti> yeah, the PR makes it much easier to answer this question :)
18:12 <maqusat> 4, enum BuriedDeployment in consensus/params.h
18:12 <jnewbery> did anyone read the optech "soft fork activation" draft?
18:13 <jnewbery> I suppose we could argue that some of the very old satoshi-era softforks described here are also buried: https://deploy-preview-531--bitcoinops.netlify.app/en/topics/soft-fork-activation/#2009-hardcoded-height-consensus-nlocktime-enforcement
18:13 <maqusat> sorry 5 ;)
18:13 <jnewbery> since those were retroactively applied to the whole block chain and became part of the regular consensus rules
18:14 <jnewbery> but I like the answer 5
18:14 <amiti> that write up was fantastic!
18:14 <jnewbery> I agree!
18:14 <jnewbery> Onwards
18:14 <jnewbery> How many version bits deployments are there? Where are they listed in the code?
18:14 <glozow> question, is it ok to think of it as synonymous with BIP9 deployments?
18:15 <maqusat> 2, enum DeploymentPos in consensus/params.h
18:15 <glozow> I counted just 2, CSV and segwit but idk :(
18:15 <ccdle12> I think its `vDeployments` in chainparams?
18:16 <glozow> oh wait, i think i misunderstood the question. are we not talking about past deployments? :O
18:16 <jnewbery> glozow: right, two soft forks have been activated using version bits. What I meant to ask was "how many version bits deployments are defined in the code after this PR?"
18:16 <amiti> yeah, I think its the DeploymentPos values that are not MAX, which are assigned to chainparams vDeployments. so 2: testdummy and taproot.
18:17 <glozow> oh oops 🤦
18:17 <jnewbery> maqusat amiti: yes!
18:17 <michaelfolkson> glozow: BIP 8 and BIP 148 and BIP 91 are all version bits deployments. But in the codebase you'll only find BIP 9 reference
18:18 <jnewbery> and they're listed here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/consensus/params.h#L25-L31
18:18 <jnewbery> Next question. What are the advantages of using a buried deployment instead of a version bits deployment?
18:18 <b10c> It's super clear now, originaly tried to find the buried deployments and version bits on master...
18:19 <jnewbery> b10c: indeed. This is a very nice cleanup.
18:19 <amiti> with the version bits deployments there are more logical forks.. check the state to decide what validation rules to apply to a txn / block. with buried deployment you just assume the new rules apply
18:19 <jnewbery> amiti: right, it simplifies the code
18:19 <glozow> michaelfolkson: those are names of proposed activation methods not deployments
18:20 <jnewbery> any other motiviations for burying a deployment?
18:20 <ccdle12> removing technical debt/stale code
18:20 <michaelfolkson> glozow: BIP 148 was deployed in a non-Core release
18:21 <maqusat> limited bit space?
18:21 <jnewbery> ccdle12: I think that's the same as amiti's reason: simplifying the code
18:21 <ember_> maqusat versionbits get repurposed
18:22 <ember_> less logic, less potential for bugs, theoretically
18:22 <ccdle12> jnewbery: ah sorry, was just thinking in terms of just removing the code, I think I misread the original question
18:22 <jnewbery> maqusat: I _think_ the versionbits code already allowed bits to be reused if the dates don't overlap. It's certainly allowed in BIP9
18:22 <b10c> jnewbery: avoid deployment problems with super deep reorgs? not sure if the super deep reorgs are the bigger problem here
18:23 <glozow> if the code is still in there, IBD nodes will use it to calculate when to activate stuff when they're catching up. could it be possible to accidentally introduce a bug while we're touching it, and affect IBD nodes?
18:23 <glozow> i guess that falls into the technical debt category
18:23 <maqusat> oh ok thx
18:23 <jnewbery> b10c: that's not what I was thinking, but it is an interesting point. A very deep reorg could result in a consensus failure. We're talking a reorg of many years worth of blocks, and if that happens we have other problems
18:23 <jnewbery> Did anyone read the original buried deployments BIP?
18:24 <jnewbery> https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0090.mediawiki#motivation
18:24 <michaelfolkson> jnewbery: I did, yeah
18:25 <maqusat> generally easier burying, less code changes. does it also allow for earlier testability (regtest)? seen that mentioned in one of original comments with motivations
18:25 <glozow> applying the logic for activation is more computationally expensive than just checking a block height
18:25 <michaelfolkson> Comments summary of BIP 90 was "Mostly Recommended for implementation, with some Discouragement"
18:25 <jnewbery> BIP 90 included performance as a motivation. The activation method before BIP 9 was ISM, and that was inefficient. Burying those ISM deployments is a performance win.
18:25 <jnewbery> BIP 90 is much more efficient because we cache the deployment state for each retarget period
18:26 <jnewbery> *BIP 9 is much more efficient
18:26 <michaelfolkson> I think the discouragement is in reference to that extremely large re-org risk and not burying too soon after activation
18:27 <prayank> jnewbery: BIP 90 is for achieving the same thing as this PR but Bitcoin Core already follows BIP 90. Sorry, I am confused.
18:27 <jnewbery> So the original motivation for BIP 90 was both performance and code simplicity. The performance part isn't such a consideration for burying BIP 9 deployments, but the code simplicity motivation is still there
18:28 <michaelfolkson> prayank: BIP 90 is just for buried deployments. This PR makes it easier to bury deployments. They were still possible before this PR
18:28 <jnewbery> prayank: there have been buried deployments in Bitcoin Core since BIP 90 was implemented. This PR simply refactors the code to make it simpler to bury future deployments
18:28 <b10c> prayank: this PR cleans the implementation of BIP 90 up
18:28 <prayank> Thanks
18:28 <jnewbery> let's keep moving! Since C++11, we generally prefer to use scoped enumerations. What are the advantages of using scoped enums? Are they used in this PR? Why?
18:29 <jonatack> hi
18:29 <genef> scoped enums prevent leaking names/enum variants
18:29 <ccdle12> prevent implicit conversions
18:29 <glozow> Scoped enums are usually nice: the enumerators can't be implicitly converted to another type and they can be forward-declared.
18:29 <jonatack> scoped enums are...scoped, don't pollute the global namespace, and don't implicitly convert to int
18:30 <jnewbery> woohoo lots of c++ gurus in here :)
18:30 <b10c> but they aren't used here!
18:30 <glozow> leaking refers to, you can't confuse a `Blue::Berry` with `JNew::Berry`
18:30 <jonatack> with plain old enums, the enum type isn't explicitly defined
18:30 <jnewbery> glozow: it _is_ possible to forward declare an unscoped enum as long as you've explicitly declared the underlying type :p
18:30 <jonatack> it just has to be large enough to hold the enumerators
18:30 <glozow> jnewbery: ok tru
18:31 <jnewbery> jonatack: are you talking about the underlying type?
18:31 <glozow> here you can just say `Consensus::DEPLOYMENT_TAPROOT` when you're adding the activation code,
18:31 <glozow> and then you don't need to change it after you bury it. You just move `DEPLOYMENT_TAPROOT` from `DeploymentPos` to `DeploymentBuried`.
18:31 <jonatack> yes
18:31 <jonatack> just went through these things for https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21506
18:31 <glozow> they still don't leak into global namespace because they're in the `Consensus` namespace yeah?
18:31 <jonatack> "p2p, refactor: make NetPermissionFlags an enum class"
18:32 <jnewbery> jonatack: you can explicitly declare the underlying type (or not) for both scoped and unscoped enums
18:32 <jonatack> jnewbery: you can
18:32 <jonatack> https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#S-enum
18:32 <jonatack> is a good resource
18:33 <amiti> glozow: +1
18:33 <jnewbery> glozow: v good! yes, the enum is declared in the Consensus namespace, so it's scoped to that namespace
18:33 <jnewbery> jonatack: yes! The cpp core guidelines are an excellent resource!
18:33 <jnewbery> everyone happy with the enums? Any questions or should we move on
18:34 <jnewbery> What is DeploymentEnabled() used for? Can it ever return false for a buried deployment?
18:34 <maqusat> determine if a deployment has a block height assigned. probably could return false for deployments that have got buried without ever being activated (not having block height assigned), though probably it's cleaner to remove such from the code altogether?
18:35 <glozow> For ongoing deployments, it checks the `BIP9Deployment` struct. For buried deployments, it uses the `DeploymentHeight()` to get a height.
18:35 <glozow> All of the buried deployments have assigned DeploymentHeights that are not `std::numeric_limits<int>::max()`, so the condition should always return true.
18:35 <glozow>    So, no, it can't return false for a buried deployment.
18:35 <glozow> I interpreted false to mean "we don't know about this deployment"
18:35 <glozow> "dis not possible"
18:36 <jnewbery> maquasat: yes, I agree
18:36 <jnewbery> glozow: is it possible for any of the buried deployments to have a height that is "std::numeric_limits<int>::max()"?
18:36 <glozow> is it? idk
18:37 <b10c> it can return false if you don't impelement the case in DeploymentHeight() (but it gave me compiler warnings when testing)
18:37 <genef> no, it's type is int16_t
18:37 <jnewbery> This is the logic we're talking about: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/deploymentstatus.h#L46
18:38 <glozow> can you bury without assigning it an enumerator in `BuriedDeployment`?
18:38 <glozow> i confused :(
18:38 <jnewbery> glozow: oh no! What dis??? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/chainparams.cpp#L483-L486
18:38 <jnewbery> "Segwit disabled for testing\n"
18:39 <glozow> ohhh
18:39 <jnewbery> so currently, it _is_ possible for segwit to be 'undefined'. We use that in some of the tests.
18:40 <jnewbery> Although I would very much like to get rid of that. It's not very useful, since segwit has been active for about 3 years now.
18:40 <jnewbery> Does that make sense to everyone?  DeploymentEnabled() can return false for segwit if we disabled it for testing
18:41 <glozow> yessir
18:41 <b10c> makes sense
18:41 <jnewbery> Next question
18:41 <jnewbery> What is the version bits cache used for?
18:42 <michaelfolkson> Caching per-period state for soft forks deployed in parallel
18:42 <b10c> caches the per-period and per-softfork deployment state. this works because all blocks in a period have the same deployment state
18:42 <michaelfolkson> Which will probably never get used?
18:43 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: why do you say it's only for forks in parallel? All version bits deployments use the version bits cache
18:43 <michaelfolkson> jnewbery: Gotcha, I misunderstood that. Thanks
18:44 <glozow> so you calculate the state for every block that's 0 mod 2016 and then use the cache for all the others?
18:45 <jnewbery> glozow: right
18:45 <jnewbery> state can only change on retarget boundaries
18:45 <b10c> where is the implemtation of the 'mod 2016'?
18:45 <b10c> must have missed it
18:46 <amiti> I think its in `GetStateFor`
18:46 <jnewbery> Here you go: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/versionbits.cpp#L20-L23
18:46 <amiti> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/versionbits.cpp#L22
18:46 <amiti> oh darn
18:46 <jnewbery> snap!
18:46 <amiti> you beat me :)
18:47 <jnewbery> nPeriod is 2016 for mainnet
18:47 <b10c> thanks jnewbry amiti!
18:47 <jonatack> jnewbery is really fast (recalling that scavenger hunt in NYC)
18:48 <prayank> lol
18:48 <jnewbery> on regtest, the retarget period is 144. Look for nMinerConfirmationWindow in chainparams.cpp
18:49 <jnewbery> jonatack: (:
18:49 <glozow> why does regtest retarget at all?
18:49 <jnewbery> so we can test things
18:49 <sipa> glozow: because we want to be able to test the retargetting mechanism
18:50 <jnewbery> actually retarget boundaries are a fertile source of bugs
18:50 <jnewbery> there have been plenty of off-by-ones around those
18:50 <jnewbery> Next question. If the taproot soft fork is activated, and sometime later we want to bury that activation method, what changes need to be made to the code?
18:50 <glozow> oh mm. but it doesn't actually change difficulty right?
18:51 <jnewbery> (assuming this PR is merged)
18:51 <michaelfolkson> That why we have both DeploymentActiveAt and DeploymentActiveAfter? Because we are worried by off-by-ones?
18:51 <sugarjig> Is that where we would move the value from `DeploymentPos` to `BuriedDeployment`?
18:51 <amiti> I think you'd just need to move taproot from DeploymentPos enum to BuriedDeployment?
18:52 <sipa> glozow: consensus.fPowNoRetargeting = true;
18:52 <sipa> you're right; regtest doesn't actually retarget
18:52 <sipa> but it does still have versionbits logic
18:53 <glozow> that makes sense
18:53 <maqusat> move DEPLOYMENT_TAPROOT form DeploymentPos to BuriedDeployment
18:53 <ccdle12> apologies if this is a silly question but.. with burying taproot, I think theres still some taproot_active bools floating around, would those have to be removed as well to constitute a bury?
18:53 <felixweis> could on regtest have the diff change (recalculate) but not actually enforce?
18:54 <jnewbery> sugarjig amiti maqusat: exactly! There are a couple more small changes, but that's essentially it. Crucially, I don't think you'd need to change any logic in validation.
18:54 <glozow> also need to add the height ya?
18:54 <michaelfolkson> felixweis: I think that is what sipa and glozow concluded for regtest
18:54 <glozow> is there an rpc or something that could tell you when taproot activated?
18:54 <genef> what's the typical time to bury a deployment after activation?
18:55 <michaelfolkson> genef: SegWit was done 2 years after
18:55 <b10c> glozow: ha! :d
18:55 <jnewbery> ccdle: not a silly question at all! Where does the taproot_active bool get set?
18:55 <ccdle12> I saw it in policy.h
18:55 <ccdle12> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4a540683ec40393d6369da1a9e02e45614db936d/src/policy/policy.h#L111
18:55 <michaelfolkson> genef: No science though. Whenever a PR gets opened, reviewed and merged. As long as it isn't too soon after activation
18:56 <sipa> ccdle12: that's where it is used
18:56 <jnewbery> ccdle12: Right, it's in the function signature. Where does the caller of that function set it?
18:56 <genef> michaelfolkson: thanks
18:56 <ccdle12> ah right in validation.cpp before accepting the tx to the mempool
18:57 <b10c> glozow: I saw this: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16060/files#r290696589
18:57 <jnewbery> ccdle12: yes, and how is the bool set?
18:58 <amiti> glozow, b10c: yeah, getblockchaininfo has a `bip9_softforks` section that gives you `status`
18:58 <glozow> b10c: amiti: ooh thanks
18:58 <ccdle12> jnewbery: ThresholdState::ACTIVE
18:58 <jnewbery> It's set here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e72e062e5a8279864d746776dc9072c112ddc014/src/validation.cpp#L718 by DeploymentActiveAt()
18:59 <jnewbery> so that code doesn't need to be changed to move the taproot deployment from versionbits to buried
18:59 <ccdle12> jnewbery: I see thank you!
18:59 <jnewbery> This is all assuming that this PR #19438 is merged, of course.
19:00 <jnewbery> ok, there was one more question that aj added that I'm afraid we don't have time for! We can leave it as an exercise for the reader.
19:00 <jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
