---
layout: pr
date: 2021-06-16
title: "Mitigate disk filling attacks by rate limiting LogPrintf"
pr: 21603
authors: [dergoegge]
components: ["utils/log/libs"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: 855d05e43
---

This week, we'll look at two alternative PRs for rate-limiting logging to the disk:

- [Mitigate disk filling attacks by rate limiting LogPrintf](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21603)
- [Mitigate disk filling attacks by globally rate limiting LogPrintf](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21706)

## Notes

- Bitcoin Core can log events either to stdout or to a log file on disk (or
  both). There are [various configuration
  options](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f66eceae/src/init/common.cpp#L63-L78)
  to control the logging, including:

  - `-debuglogfile` to specify the file to log to. Setting `-nodebuglogfile`
    disables logging to file entirely.
  - `-debug` to enable low-level debug logging. Can be specified as
    `-debug=<comma-separated list of categories>` to only log certain
    categories. Note that even with `-nodebug`, Bitcoin Core will still log
    important events to file by default.
  - `-logips`, `-logtimestamps`, `-logthreadnames`, `-logsourcelocations` and
    `-logtimemicros` all specify additional information that can be added to
    each log line.
  - `-printtoconsole` controls whether the logging is output to stdout as well
    as the log file.

- We expect most users to run with default options. For logging, that means
  that important, high-level logs will be written to file, but low-level
  debugging logs will not.

- A specific log in the code can be assigned to one of several [different
  categories](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f66eceae/src/logging.cpp#L133-L163).
  Those categories include things like "net" for events in the networking and p2p code,
  "validation" for events in the validation code, and so on.

- We use two macros for logging:

  - `LogPrintf()` logs unconditionally (unless `-nodebuglogfile` and
    `-noprinttoconsole` are set).
  - `LogPrint()` logs if the specified category is enabled. For example,
    `LogPrint(BCLog::NET, "<log message>");` will only log if the 'net'
    category is enabled.

- One possible class of denial of service attacks is for an adversary to
  cause a victim node to repeatedly write logs to disk. This would eventually
  cause the victim's disk to fill up, and the node to fail.

- For that reason, we want the unconditional `LogPrintf()` macro to be used
  sparingly, and only in places where an attacker can't easily trigger a log
  being written.

- More generally, it would be good if there was a mechanism that could
  eliminate this entire class of potential exploits by throttling logging
  whenever it exceeds a certain rate. [Issue
  21559](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/21559) documents the potential
  exploit and suggested fix.

- PRs [21603](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21603) and
  [21706](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21706) are two alternative
  approaches. One implements rate-limiting per log location, and one implements
  rate-limiting globally. Both were implemented by the same author, who is
  seeking conceptual/approach review.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. Macros are [generally discouraged in
   C++](https://www.stroustrup.com/bs_faq2.html#macro). Why do we use them for
   our logging routines?

3. Try enabling logging for all categories and starting Bitcoin Core (eg with
   `bitcoind -debug=all`). Is the output useful? Are there specific categories
   which generate a lot of logs?

4. The two approaches are to rate-limit logs per-location and globally. What
   are the advantages and disadvantages of those two approaches? Which do
   you think would result in more useful log output?

5. Both PRs add a new `LogPrintfWithoutRateLimiting()` macro. What is this
   used for? Why is it important?

6. Both PRs add new variables `m_bytes_dropped` and `m_messages_dropped`. How
   are these variables used? How would they be useful for a developer trying
   to debug an issue?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
10:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
10:00 < amiti> hi
10:00 < dunxen> hi!
10:00 < hiii> can you recommend some bitcoin dev and other crypto channels?
10:00 < LarryRuane> hi
10:00 < jnewbery> hi folks. Welcome to PR review club. Feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
10:00 < dergoegge> hi
10:00 < sriramdvt> hi
10:00 < svav> Hi All
10:00 < jnewbery> hiii: hi! Welcome.
10:00 < lightlike> hi
10:00 < schmidty> Hi
10:00 < hiii> oh hi amiti.. arent u a mentor for summerofbitcoin?
10:00 < jnewbery> Is anyone else here for the first time?
10:01 < vasanth2[m]> me!
10:01 < michaelfolkson> hi
10:01 < prakash> hi
10:01  * hannibit hi
10:01 < jnewbery> vasanth2[m]: welcome :)
10:01 < emzy> hi
10:01 < vasanth2[m]> thank you jnewbery :D
10:01 < jnewbery> The notes and questions are in the normal place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/21603
10:02 < amiti> hiii: yup :salute:
10:02 < jnewbery> who had a chance to read the notes & questions, and review the PR? (y/n)?
10:02 < LarryRuane> y
10:02 < emzy> n
10:02  * hannibit n
10:02 < michaelfolkson> y
10:02 < amiti> brief review y
10:02 < dergoegge> y :D
10:02 < dunxen> y-ish
10:02 < hiii> i feel honored to chat with u, hi again amiti.. where can I ask about summerofbitcoin related questions? as in when is it starting, etc. If there is an offtopic channel please let me know
10:02 < svav> y - Read the notes, did not review the PR
10:03 < sriramdvt> n
10:03 < prakash> y
10:03 < sipa> hiii: not now, please, there is a meeting ongoing about a specific pull request
10:03 < jnewbery> hiii: a bit offtopic for now. Can you save it for after the meeting please?
10:03 < hiii> ok got it
10:03 < jnewbery> dergoegge authored the PRs, so I'm glad he also had time to review them :)
10:04 < jnewbery> I have a series of questions to guide the conversation, but feel free to jump in at any point and ask your own questions if anything is unclear. We're all here to learn, so questions are very welcome.
10:04 < jnewbery> ok, let's get started
10:04 < jnewbery> Did you review the PR? Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK? What was your review approach?
10:04 < jnewbery> And also, can you briefly summarize what the PRs are trying to do?
10:05 < FelixWeis> y
10:05 < svav> Are trying to prevent a potential attack vector, the vector being the logging system and its overstimulation
10:06 < michaelfolkson> So Concept ACK and then Approach ACK is whether it should be global or not
10:06 < svav> If a node is made to log too much, it can fill up all disk space and bring down the node
10:06 < jnewbery> svav: right. Trying to prevent an attacker from filling our disk with logs
10:06 < emzy> Concept ACK. It implements rate limits for every logging category separately.
10:07 < LarryRuane> I'm not sure if I'm an approach ACK even ... are you all aware of an existing mitigation for excess logging? the logrotate command, and also see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/search?q=m_reopen_file
10:07 < dunxen> Concept ACK. The PRs add throttling for debug logging to prevent filling disk and DoS-ing our node
10:07 < jnewbery> How about people's review approach? Did anyone test this manually? Were you able to trigger the log rate-limiting?
10:07 < LarryRuane> what logrotate does is, in effect, gives you a sliding window of the latest log messages (configurable in size)
10:08 < michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: And deletes old logs?
10:08 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: very good point. Can you explain how it works?
10:08 < LarryRuane> when a log file reaches a certain size, logrotate can move it (safely) to another name, and recreate a new log file
10:08 < FelixWeis> mostly tried to fiddle with range-diff to understand the 2 different prs and their commonality
10:09 < LarryRuane> then logrotate can do something with it, like compress it, delete it, send it somewhere, etc (configurable)
10:09 < svav> In general, how big a problem do people think disk filling attacks could be at present? How was it established that this is a serious attack surface?
10:09 < jnewbery> The functionality that LarryRuane is refering to was added here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/917
10:09 < LarryRuane> downside of logrotate, possibly: i'm not sure if there's a windows version .. it's built into linux (and probably other unixs)
10:10 < sipa> LarryRuane: is it common/easy to use logrotate for rotating user logs (as opposed to system-level services)?
10:10 < lightlike> since this is not a bitcoin-specific attack vector: are there any famous examples where some kind of logging DOS attack was executed and caused damage?
10:10 < svav> Has anyone worked out how quickly this attack could bring a node down?
10:10 < jnewbery> svav: there have been quite a few logs that have been removed/changed to LogPrint(<category>) to prevent such a thing being possible
10:11 < jnewbery> this PR is a more general approach
10:11 < LarryRuane> sipa: I really don't know, there is a man page for logrotate, so that may indicate that it's not internal-linux only
10:11 < FelixWeis> when we do a log rotate, does it create a new debug.log? on macos its continuing to write to debug.log.1
10:11 < LarryRuane> i thought about writing a script in contrib, or documenting logrotate (specifically for bitcoind), that may be a good idea
10:12 < sipa> LarryRuane: i'm familiar with logrotate, and i have no doubt it can be configured for our purposes - my question if it's easy to do so
10:12 < jnewbery> I think logrotate is probably the best solution, but we can't expect all users to configure logrotate if they just want to start a bitcoin core node
10:12 < sipa> can we make bitcoind "subscribe" to logrotate, without needing system configuration?
10:12 < sipa> as in without needing the user to go edit a config file
10:12 < dergoegge> svav: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19995#issuecomment-697434667 praticalswift has some numbers here
10:12 < LarryRuane> i used to know a lot about logrotate, need to re-investigate
10:12 < michaelfolkson> Do people here actively monitor and manage the size of their logs? I can imagine they get pretty big on most verbose logging even without an attack
10:13 < sipa> how many people enable debug=net or other spammy log categories even
10:13 < jnewbery> sipa: that seems like a good question, but what would the defaults be? Archive files and only keep the x most recent?
10:13 < emzy> I see no one using logrotate for the GUI version of any software...
10:13 < sipa> emzy: indeed
10:13 < LarryRuane> what's interesting is, barring logging bugs (that these two PRs are addressing), the logging should be linear with the size of the blockchain (the UpdateTip messages)
10:14 < sipa> if you don't enable any debug logging this should be almost a non-issue
10:14 < jnewbery> I believe the motivation here is to eliminate the possibility of a non-category log (ie a logPrint(...) rather than a logPrintf(<category>, ...)) from completely filling up the disk
10:14 < LarryRuane> so if you have space for blockchain growth, you have space for logging (a small constant factor increase)
10:15 < jnewbery> I think if you're running with -debug=all or -debug=spammy_component, then you're already an advanced user and you should be able to manage you disk
10:15 < emzy> LarryRuane: I think that depends on logging settings.
10:15 < LarryRuane> yes, IIUC, these PRs are really to work around logging bugs
10:15 < LarryRuane> emzy: yes I meant with no extra debug logs turned on
10:16 < jnewbery> but if you just install and run bitcoind or bitcoin-qt and hit run, then we don't want a log to be able to fill your disk
10:16 < amiti> oh interesting, does the current logic in the PR apply to the logging categories?
10:16 < amiti> I was wondering about how categories were handled, net logs print a LOT
10:16 < jnewbery> I believe the logic applies to both, but the main motivation is for non-category logs
10:17 < amiti> yeah I saw the categories being counted & maintained (esp for the PR that locally supresses), but also looks like its bounded by the same rate across the board?
10:17 < jnewbery> I'm going to move on to the next question, but if you still have approach questions or comments, feel free to continue sharing them
10:17 < jnewbery> 2. Macros are generally discouraged in C++. Why do we use them for our logging routines?
10:17 < dergoegge> amiti: it only applies to non-category logs
10:17 < LarryRuane> jnewbery: yes, if you specifically enable categories, you're aware that logging could fill up the disk
10:17 < jnewbery> dergoegge: ah. Thanks!
10:17 < amiti> dergoegge: ohhh, ok
10:17 < LarryRuane> jnewbery: filenames and line numbers!
10:18 < FelixWeis> i believe macros are the only way to get file/fucntion/line number info ?
10:18 < dergoegge> see here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/855d05e4377cd1eb902cd74c80056d59cb98b7b8/src/logging.h#L220
10:18 < dergoegge>  /* skip_disk_usage_rate_limiting */ true
10:18 < jnewbery> oh interesting. That wasn't going to be my answer!
10:18 < amiti> I found the PR history of this functionality interesting
10:18 < dergoegge> people using -debug are assumed to be advanced and know the risks
10:19 < amiti> looks like #17218 is what brought back a macro so we don't unnecessary evaluate expressions
10:19 < jnewbery> dergoegge: +1
10:19 < FelixWeis> should enabling debug= logs disable the rate limiting?
10:19 < jnewbery> FelixWeis: there's a separate config option to disable rate limiting
10:20 < LarryRuane> amiti: "so we don't unnecessary evaluate expressions" -- that makes sense, do we test that the logging expressions don't crash the system? I think possibly that the functional tests run with -debug
10:20 < michaelfolkson> dergoegge: But people using -debug are a more attractive target :) Their logs are already huge (assuming they aren't cleaning disk regularly)
10:20 < jnewbery> amiti: exactly. Good code archaeology! 17218 fixes a regression where logPrintf was changed to a function.
10:21 < jnewbery> oh sorry, I mean LogPrint(), not LogPrintf()
10:21 < LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: my impression is that people enable debug logs only for a limited time, to look into a specific problem
10:21 < michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Right, sounds reasonable
10:22 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: The functional tests run with all debug logs *except* leveldb and libevent logs: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6bc1eca01b2f88e081e71b783b3d45287700f8a5/test/functional/test_framework/test_node.py#L101-L103
10:22 < dergoegge> LarryRuane: i would assume the same
10:23 < jnewbery> leveldb and libevent logs are very talkative!
10:23 < FelixWeis> Im using debug=mempool in a project to get ATMP and replacement timings. If I didn't read the changelog when upgrading I might miss out on valuable statistics.
10:23 < LarryRuane> jnewbery: that's wise, was going to suggest that if not already being done
10:24 < svav> So we use a macro instead of a function for conditional logging so arguments are not evaluated when logging for the category is not enabled ... ?
10:24 < jnewbery> svav: exactly right
10:24 < jnewbery> Macros are essentially find-and-replace commands run by the preprocessor, LogPrint(<category>, ...) will expand to:
10:24 < LarryRuane> I wonder if there's a way to have the compiler ensure that logging expressions don't have side-effects
10:25 < michaelfolkson> leveldb was the worst! I can't even imagine the logs being that useful assuming a leveldb bug but maybe they are in some edge case
10:25 < dergoegge> FelixWeis: category logs will never be dropped
10:25 < jnewbery> if (enabled(<category>)) log(...)
10:25 < FelixWeis> dergoegge: oh good
10:25 < jnewbery> so if the category is disabled, then we won't evaluate the arguements to the LogPrint() macro
10:26 < jnewbery> which might be nice if we had something like LogPrint(<category>, ReadThingFromDisk(), DoAnExpensiveCalculation(), ...)
10:26 < jnewbery> ok, moving on to the next question
10:26 < jnewbery> 3. Try enabling logging for all categories and starting Bitcoin Core (eg with bitcoind -debug=all). Is the output useful? Are there specific categories which generate a lot of logs?
10:27 < LarryRuane> it is useful, net generates a lot
10:27 < jnewbery> Did people manage to do this? How did you enjoy the bitcoind logs?
10:27 < michaelfolkson> A fun read
10:27 < LarryRuane> grep is your friend :)
10:27 < dergoegge> usefulness depends on what you are looking for i guess, but yea lots of net logs
10:28 < lightlike> in the functional tests, it's really helpful to understand what's going on
10:28 < michaelfolkson> The net logs looked useful to me
10:28 < jnewbery> good! There are lots of config options to make the logs more useful: -logips, -logtimestamps, -logthreadnames, -logsourcelocations and -logtimemicros
10:28 < LarryRuane> also libevent .. can someone give a quick explanation of what libevent does? (if that's too much side-track, that's ok)
10:29 < michaelfolkson> Though some of those net logs appear in the minimal log
10:29 < jnewbery> using -logthreadnames and looking at the validationinterface callbacks being enqueued and then the callbacks being called is a really good exercise to see how validation processing happens and triggers events in different subsystems
10:29 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: we use libevent for our RPC server. I think that's it currently.
10:30 < michaelfolkson> What does libevent do specifically though?
10:30 < jnewbery> I think there was talk of using some of its functionality for our p2p networking, but I don't really know the details of that
10:31 < jnewbery> lightlike: I agree. I'd suggest running some functional tests with -nocleanup, and then running the combine logs parser with -c to colorize the different nodes. Gives you a good view of what the different nodes in the test are doing.
10:32 < jnewbery> Next question: The two approaches are to rate-limit logs per-location and globally. What are the advantages and disadvantages of those two approaches? Which do you think would result in more useful log output?
10:33 < michaelfolkson> Advantages of global - better cut off logs, better log experience in the case of cut off. Disadvantages of global - we generally want to avoid global due to security, tight coupling
10:34 < emzy> I think this PR makes more sense than the global alternative, because global rate limiting would open another attack vector.
10:34 < emzy> An attacker could trigger the global limit in one category and conceal another attack from the log.
10:34 < svav> I don't know much about this, but I'd say if you'd do it locally, it might be better, because it won't affect the whole network
10:35 < LarryRuane> no, global in this context means across the entire bitcoind node (the local node)
10:35 < svav> Locally means only nodes affected by overstimulation of logging would have restrictions applied, so only nodes being impacted would be controlled
10:35 < lightlike> one advantage of global: less bookkeeping necessary over all the different locations that might log.
10:35 < michaelfolkson> So kind of user experience vs security conversation. Depends how non-trivial the security concern is
10:35 < jnewbery> svav: you're misunderstanding how I'm using 'local' and 'global'. 'local' means "only rate-limit the loggin from this line of code". 'global' means "rate-limit logs from across the whole program"
10:35 < LarryRuane> i was expecting the global PR (21706) to be simpler, but it seems about the same complexity
10:36 < svav> jnewbery: thanks for clarifying
10:37 < LarryRuane> overall, I'm surprised how complex both of these PRs are (over 200 lines of diff), given what they do .. but maybe that's just how it has to be
10:37 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: much of that is new tests
10:37 < LarryRuane> ah, good point
10:38 < jnewbery> dergoegge added the second (global) implementation based on a review comment I made in the original PR: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19995#pullrequestreview-505540213 (thanks dergoegge!)
10:39 < LarryRuane> maybe a simpler approach, that might be good enough, is to keep track of only the most recent logged message, and if it's repeated (soon), don't log it ... and after some timeout, log "last message repeated 200 times" or whatever
10:39 < LarryRuane> but then i guess if each log message includes some specific data, like a hash, that wouldn't help
10:39 < jnewbery> I'll explain why I suggested global log-shedding. If we only drop logs from a single location, we end up with a log file that looks normal, but some logs are missing. The only way to know that is to search for a very specific "start dropping logs" or "stop dropping logs" log.
10:40 < jnewbery> whereas if you drop logs globally, it's much more obvious that they're being dropped
10:40 < LarryRuane> that makes sense to me
10:41 < jnewbery> I think partial logging is quite dangerous. I've been tripped up many times debugging issues when the logs are incomplete and I've been sent in the wrong direction. For example, what would you conclude if there was the following code:
10:41 < jnewbery> log(1);
10:41 < jnewbery> if (condition) {
10:41 < jnewbery>     do_thing();
10:41 < jnewbery>     log(2);
10:41 < jnewbery> }
10:41 < jnewbery> log(3)
10:41 < jnewbery> and then you saw this log:
10:41 < jnewbery> cat log.txt
10:41 < jnewbery> > 1 3
10:41 < LarryRuane> !condition :)
10:42 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: right
10:42 < dergoegge> but if 2 was suppressed the logs would say so
10:42 < dergoegge> but you might have to search for it
10:42 < jnewbery> dergoegge: maybe much further up in the log file
10:42 < jnewbery> and if you weren't aware of that feature you wouldn't know to look
10:43 < dergoegge> thats true, could be very annoying
10:44 < jnewbery> I don't think it's a huge issue, but it's something I've tripped over before. Thanks to dergoegge for implementing both approaches
10:44 < jnewbery> Any other thoughts on global vs local, or shall we move on?
10:44 < dergoegge> i dont have a strong preference and am happy to maintain either
10:44 < michaelfolkson> So how to pick which one? Gut feel is that global just about edges it
10:45 < jnewbery> I think if no-one has a very strong preference, then the person implementing it gets to choose. I'm an approach ACK on either
10:46 < jnewbery> ok, next question. Both PRs add a new LogPrintfWithoutRateLimiting() macro. What is this used for? Why is it important?
10:47 < dergoegge> jnewbery: that sounds fair, i will pick one of the two in the upcoming days based on the reviews
10:48 < dergoegge> LogPrintfWithoutRateLimiting() is only used once in validation.cpp for "new best=<hash>" logs
10:48 < lightlike> to exclude messages from the rate limting that are written a lot during IBD and cannot be abused as an attack vector (because they require miner's work)
10:48 < dergoegge> lightlike: well said +1
10:49 < jnewbery> lightlike dergoegge: right!
10:49 < jnewbery> it'd be a shame to start rate-limiting a really important log during initial sync
10:50 < jnewbery> 6. Both PRs add new variables m_bytes_dropped and m_messages_dropped. How are these variables used? How would they be useful for a developer trying to debug an issue?
10:52 < dergoegge> they are used to keep track of how many messages and how many bytes were dropped. we can use this to decide if logging should be resumed or print a tally at the end of a suppression period
10:53 < jnewbery> dergoegge: you're right!
10:53 < dergoegge> only the non-global approach uses them to decide if logging should be resumed
10:53 < jnewbery> you've done a very thorough review :)
10:53 < dergoegge> :D
10:53 < jnewbery> ok, any final questions before we wrap up?
10:53 < prakash> Hi..I am new here. I have a question on global vs local. Is global dropping all Logprintf messages if the rate limit kicks in ? If so, would'nt an attacker be able to disable logging altogether before an actual attack?
10:55 < jnewbery> prakash: that's exactly what global log-shedding would do. However, I don't think attackers are generally worried about their victim's logs.
10:55 < jnewbery> but it's a good thought!
10:55 < LarryRuane> A general question came up for me during review of these PRs ... if we add a new function, is the convention to be before or after the first (maybe only) call point?
10:56 < emzy> jnewbery: in general I dissagree. Not sure if in Bitcoin it is the case.
10:56 < jnewbery> LarryRuane: I don't understand the question. What is before or after the call point?
10:56 < LarryRuane> is "bottom-up" (low level functions followed by higher-level), or "top-down" (higher level followed by lower level functions)?
10:57 < jnewbery> emzy: maybe you're right. I just can't think of a scenario where someone exploiting a weakness in Bitcoin Core would also need to suppress logs.
10:57 < emzy> jnewbery: Right. But there could be one.
10:57 < prakash> jnewbery: I was implying that the attacker can hide what he is doing. Yes. It may be unrealistic scenario. Thanks for clarifying :)
10:58 < jnewbery> emzy prakash: you may be right!
10:58 < lightlike> LarryRuane: do you mean the placement of the code for the function in the source code?
10:59 < prakash> but i was able to print repeated messages logged in about incorrect rpc password : "ThreadRPCServer incorrect password attempt from 127.0.0.1" ...so technically it would be easy to turn off logging.
10:59 < prakash> but this would be a targeted attack vector. not network wide attack.
10:59 < LarryRuane> yes ... this PR adds ComputeQuotaUsageStats(), and it's called from BCLog::Logger::LogPrintStr() ... so is it preferred to add the new function before or after the function that's calling it?
10:59 < michaelfolkson> prakash: Is there no limit on rpc password attempts?
11:00 < jnewbery> prakash: right. The rpc port shouldn't be open to the public internet, but it's a very good point.
11:00 < prakash> i dont see a limit in logging
11:00 < prakash> ohh. i see.
11:00 < dergoegge> prakash: the limit is 1MB per hour so that would have to be a lot of failed attempts
11:00 < jnewbery> ok, I've got to run now, but obviously feel free to continue the discussion!
11:00 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
