---
layout: pr
date: 2021-03-10
title: "BIP 350: Implement Bech32m and use it for v1+ segwit addresses"
pr: 20861
authors: [sipa]
components: ["utils/log/libs"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: 835ff6b
---

In this PR Review Club meeting, we'll discuss
[BIP350](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki) and
Bech32m.

## Notes

- An **invoice address** (aka output address, public address, or just address),
  not to be confused with public key, IP address, or P2P Addr message, is a
string of characters that represents the destination for a Bitcoin transaction.
Since users generate these addresses to send bitcoins and incorrect addresses
can result in unspendable coins, addresses include checksums to help detect
human errors such as missing characters, swapping characters, mistaking a q for
a 9, etc.

- [Bech32](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/bech32/) was introduced in
  [BIP173](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki) as a
new standard for native segwit output addresses.
For more background on Bech32, this
[video](https://youtu.be/NqiN9VFE4CU) describes Bech32 checksums and their
error correction properties.

- Bech32 had an [unexpected
  weakness](https://github.com/sipa/bech32/issues/51), leading to the
development of Bech32m, described in
[BIP350](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki).

- PR [#20861](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20861) implements BIP350
  Bech32m addresses for all segwit outputs with version 1 or higher. Note that
such outputs are not currently supported by mainnet so this does not pose a
compatibility problem for current users.  It intentionally breaks forward
compatibility for future software to prevent accidentally sending to an
unspendable v1 output.


## Questions

1.  Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
What was your review approach?

2. Can you describe the length extension mutation issue found in Bech32? Does
it affect Bitcoin addresses? Why or why not?

3. How does Bech32m solve this length extension mutation issue?

4. Which addresses will be encoded using Bech32, and which ones with Bech32m?
How does this effect the compatibility of existing software clients?

5. What are the three components of a Bech32m address encoding?

6. How does
[`Decode`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/bech32.cpp#L168)
check whether an address is encoded as Bech32 or Bech32m? Can a string be valid
in both formats?

7. The space in [this test
string](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/test/bech32_tests.cpp#L80)
is not an accident. What does it test?

8. For fun: Is Bech32 case-sensitive? (Hint: Why is
["A12UEL5L"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/test/bech32_tests.cpp#L16)
valid but
["A12uEL5L"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/test/bech32_tests.cpp#L69)
not?)


## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
18:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
18:00 <jnewbery> hi
18:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR Review Club everyone!!!
18:00 <amiti> hi!
18:00 <maqusat> hi
18:00 <AnthonyRonning> hi
18:00 <glozow> Anyone here for the first time?
18:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
18:00 <pinheadmz> wuddup
18:00 <willcl_ark_> hi
18:00 <lightlike> hi
18:00 <AsILayHodling> hi
18:00 <b10c> hi
18:00 <glozow> Today, we're looking at #20861 BIP 350: Implement Bech32m and use it for v1+ segwit addresses
18:00 <glozow> Notes: https://bitcoincore.reviews/20861
18:00 <glozow> PR: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20861
18:00 <cguida> hi
18:00 <cguida> my first time
18:01 <glozow> Welcome cguida! :)
18:01 <AnthonyRonning> cguida: welcome!
18:01 <cguida> thanks! :)
18:01 <glozow> Did y'all get a chance to review the PR and/or BIPs? What was your review approach?
18:01 <cguida> Didn't get to running the code yet, but did some reading
18:02 <jnewbery> 0.2y
18:02 <glozow> link to BIP350: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki
18:02 <AnthonyRonning> browsed a bit, not familiar with the concept at all yet
18:02 <amiti> mostly just looked through the review club notes & relevant sections in bips / code, didn't do a proper review.
18:02 <nehan> hi
18:02 <michaelfolkson> I'd Concept ACK, Approach ACKed a while ago. So looking at code, running tests etc
18:03 <maqusat> just had time to glance over
18:03 <sipa> hi
18:03 <pinheadmz> read bip and ML posts, havent tried code yet
18:03 <b10c> looked over the BIP and the reviews page
18:03 <emzy> hi
18:03 <glozow> Alrighty, maybe we could start with a light conceptual question: what is Bech32 used for exactly?
18:03 <pinheadmz> encoding data with error correction!
18:03 <pinheadmz> using a set of 32 characters
18:04 <glozow> pinheadmz: yes! what are we encoding, in the context of Bitcoin?
18:04 <pinheadmz> ok, segwit addresses
18:04 <pinheadmz> a segwit version followed by some amount of data
18:04 <jnewbery> *error detection and correction
18:04 <pinheadmz> could be a publichey hash, script hash or in the case of taproot, a bare public key
18:04 <b10c> addresses, but 'invoice' addresses and not IP addresses etc
18:04 <cguida> with a focus on character transcription errors
18:04 <sipa> (but despite supporting error correction, you should absolutely nevwr do that - if you detect errors, you should the user to go ask the real address again)
18:04 <pinheadmz> jnewbery thank u
18:05 <jonatack> hi
18:05 <glozow> ok so how important is error detection here, on the scale of meh to we-could-lose-coins?
18:05 <cguida> and simplifying display in qr codes!
18:05 <jnewbery> right, for sending to an address we shouldn't do error correction
18:05 <nehan> we-could-lose-coins
18:05 <pinheadmz> glozow youcould be sending bitcoin to the wrong person or to an unrecovaerbale key if you mess up!
18:05 <eoin> I'm a newb and don't know C++ or Python, how should I proceed?
18:05 <glozow> pinheadmz: yeah! so the error detection is key here :)
18:05 <schmidty> hi
18:06 <pinheadmz> eoin start in english? https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki
18:06 <michaelfolkson> glozow nehan: Depending on whether it is a character or two correction chances of losing coins is veeeery low
18:06 <AnthonyRonning> human readability is another aspect of bech32 as well, right?
18:06 <cguida> we-could-lose-coins, because the error could be a valid address
18:06 <cguida> with low probability
18:06 <jnewbery> eoin: welcome! Follow along as best you can. There are some good resources for newcomers here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/#other-resources-for-new-contributors
18:06 <jonatack> good resources also at: https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/bech32/
18:06 <michaelfolkson> cguida: Depending on how many characters are being corrected
18:06 <nehan> glozow: i thought we were talking about error correction generally? or do you mean specifically in bech32 addresses?
18:06 <pinheadmz> the fun parts of bech32 to me are how characters are arranged by possible visual mistake i.e. v and w
18:07 <jonatack> optech topics are a "good first stop for info"
18:07 <cguida> michaelfolkson: yes
18:07 <pinheadmz> as if someone was reading a bitcoin address and typing it in manually
18:07 <nehan> *error detection
18:07 <sipa> michaelfolkson: if you do error correction the probability of sending to the wrong address goes up spectacularly; correction only works if you make up to 2 errors (with restrictions on what those errors are); if yiu make more, it is very likely that error correction will "correct" to the wrong thing
18:07 <cguida> eoin: python is easy to get started with, send me a message if you'd like some resources
18:07 <glozow> nehan: error detection generally, yes, I want to make sure we're all clear that it's a key goal here
18:07 <jnewbery> I think we should all just pretend that error *correction* is not a thing for the purposes of this conversation
18:07 <jnewbery> and just focus on error *detection*
18:08 <pinheadmz> sure but it is cool :-)
18:08 <pinheadmz> bech32 can fix up to 3 (?) mistakes
18:08 <sipa> 2
18:08 <pinheadmz> ty
18:08 <nehan> pinheadmz: id on't think that's true!
18:08 <glozow> Ok I think we're on the same page :) Next question is a little harder: Can you describe the length extension mutation issue found in Bech32?
18:09 <michaelfolkson> The probabilities are listed somewhere I think... maybe in sipa's SF Bitcoin Devs slides
18:09 <amiti> if the address ends with a p, you can insert or delete q characters right before & it won't invalidate the checksum
18:09 <nehan> checksum for <addr>p = <addr>qqqqqp
18:09 <cguida> sipa: right, a perhaps overengineered approach would be to present the 2 or 3 closest correction strings to the user? haha
18:09 <glozow> amiti: nehan: correct!
18:10 <pinheadmz> my understanding is that the bech32 data represents a polynomial, and since x^0 = 1, you can add a bunch of extra 0's at the end of a bech32 address and its just like (checksum * 1 * 1 * 1...) so it remains valid
18:10 <glozow> can anyone tells us why this is the case?
18:10 <sipa> cguida: the BIP says you cannot do more than point out likely positions of errors
18:10 <pinheadmz> or rather data * 1 * 1 * 1... so the checksum doesnt change
18:11 <tkc> cguida:  I would be interested in those beginner resources also.  This is not the topic for today obviously, but how to connect with you outside this?
18:11 <cguida> tkc eoin just send me a dm here on irc
18:11 <glozow> pinheadmz: nice! could you tell us how we get from a string to a polynomial?
18:12 <cguida> pinheadz: ohhh
18:12 <cguida> pinheadmz*
18:12 <pinheadmz> not... really..... but theres this chart: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki#bech32
18:12 <pinheadmz> that maps charachters to numbers
18:12 <sipa> not sure i follow about the * 1 * 1 * 1
18:12 <pinheadmz> sipa my understand is pretty abstract i just barely kinda get it
18:13 <pinheadmz> that since x^0 = 1, a bunch of 0s at the end ends up just multiplying something by 1
18:13 <pinheadmz> which doesnt change the value
18:13 <sipa> hmm, no
18:13 <sipa> glozow: i can explain if you want
18:13 <michaelfolkson> +1 :)
18:14 <pinheadmz> +p
18:14 <pinheadmz> (anyone get it?)
18:14 <glozow> heh ok so, "z"=2, "p"=1 and "q"=0, so what polynomial do we get from "zqzp?"
18:14 <cguida> the checksum for bech32 has a 1 multiplied in, bech32m uses something else
18:14 <glozow> sipa: go for it :P
18:14 <cguida> or xored in
18:14 <nehan> glozow: i think you should do it and sipa can chime in :)
18:14 <michaelfolkson> nehan: +1
18:15 <sipa> if you translate the characters to poiynomials, bech32 is essentially the equation code(x) mod g(x) = 1
18:15 <glozow> jnewbery shared this earlier https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/91602/how-does-the-bech32-length-extension-mutation-weakness-work which has a good explanation
18:15 <sipa> where code(x) is the polynomial corresponding to the data (incl checksum) of the bech32 string
18:15 <sipa> and g(x) is a specific 6th degree constant
18:16 <glozow> `g(x) =  x^6 + 29x^5 + 22x^4 + 20x^3 + 21x^2 + 29x + 18`
18:16 <pinheadmz> sipa what does 6th degree constant mean ?
18:16 <sipa> pinheadmz: the exact polymonial glozow just gave
18:16 <felixweis> polynomial of degree 6
18:16 <glozow> degree 6 polynomial, same one used for every encoding
18:16 <pinheadmz> sipa is that the value gmax crunched for a week on a super computer ?
18:16 <sipa> it"s constant, not as in 0th degree, but as in: it is a constant, everyone uses tbe same
18:17 <nehan> pinheadmz: a "constant" polynomial means its coefficients are fixed, I think
18:17 <glozow> constant as in `const` :P
18:17 <sipa> pinheadmz: that one took way longer; we're talking bech32 here, not bech32m
18:17 <pinheadmz> right i was refrring to bech32
18:17 <sipa> so, we can write that as code(x) = f(x) * g(x) + 1
18:17 <pinheadmz> i understand bech32m also has a bruteforced constant
18:17 <sipa> that's the definition of modulus
18:18 <sipa> or: code(x) - 1 = f(x)*g(x)
18:18 <glozow> so to answer my earlier question "z"=2, "p"=1 and "q"=0, so what polynomial do we get from "zqzp?"
18:18 <glozow> it's `2x^3 + 0x^2 + 2x + 1` i.e. `2x^3 + 2x + 1`
18:18 <sipa> indeed!
18:19 <pinheadmz> sipa how is that a modulus? like, does it "wrap around"? bc its two polynomials being multilied?
18:19 <glozow> does everyone see how we got that?
18:19 <sipa> pinheadmz: it's just like numbers
18:19 <glozow> let me know if it's unclear and we can slow down
18:19 <sipa> yes, it wraps around
18:19 <pinheadmz> but number * number approaches infinity without wrapping
18:19 <glozow> so that modulus 1 is there so that we can't trivially create a new valid string from an old one
18:19 <sipa> it"s in the degrew instead in number of digits here
18:20 <sipa> once you go over 6th ddgree, it wraps around
18:20 <nehan> pinheadmz: you might want to study group theory a little (abstract algebra). numbers are just examples; you can apply the concepts to sets of "things" as well
18:20 <sipa> because you can subtract a bigger multiple of the modulus
18:20 <nehan> pinheadmz: in this case, the set of things is a set of polynomials, and you can operate on them
18:20 <cguida> glozow: I see how you got a polynomial from those inputs, but what's x in this case?
18:20 <sipa> cguida: x is just a variable name
18:21 <sipa> we nwver actually evaluate it in a specific value of x
18:21 <sipa> we need one to write polynomials, that's it
18:21 <glozow> cguida: you can think of polynomials as basically a vector of coefficients
18:21 <cguida> ok so the x doesn't matter, just the coefficients?
18:21 <glozow> helps to distinguish polynomials from polynomial functions
18:22 <sipa> cguida: yeah, you can say zqzp is just [1,2,0,2] (we tend to write low powers first when representing as lists)
18:22 <cguida> i'll need to play with it more i think
18:23 <cguida> sipa: ok cool
18:23 <sipa> but remember that when multiplying you need to think of them as popynomials
18:23 <michaelfolkson> cguida: You might do algebra with say x, y, z without ever ascribing values to them. This way you are playing around with specific polynomials instead of x, y and z
18:23 <b10c> Zx^3 + Qx^2 + Zx + P with Z=2, P=1 and Q=0 ==> `2x^3 + 0x^2 + 2x + 1`, right?
18:23 <sipa> so!
18:23 <glozow> ok so we have the condition for valid Bech32 being: if your string is represented as `p(x)`, you need `p(x) = f(x)*g(x) + 1` aka `p(x) mod g(x) = 1` to be true
18:23 <nehan> how did you pick g(x)?
18:23 <glozow> b10c: yep! exactly :)
18:23 <sipa> nehan: many years of CPU time
18:23 <felixweis> pinheadpmz: can confirm what nehan said, I watched a few lectures on group theory & number theory in the past couple weeks. helped also with the understanding of last weeks topic w.r.t. the magic behind minisketch
18:24 <sipa> nehan: in 2017
18:24 <nehan> sipa: what were you looking for?
18:24 <sipa> nehan: read BIP173 :)
18:24 <nehan> sipa: ok!
18:24 <glozow> so what happens if your string ends with a "p," what's the constant term in your polyonimal?
18:25 <b10c> +0
18:25 <pinheadmz> felixweis thanks i watched a few as well, can recco the Christoph Parr series on youtube. still hard to grok that multiplying to things is the "definition of a modulus" :-)
18:25 <sipa> pinheadmz: no
18:25 <felixweis> also playing around and exploring stuff with  sagemath
18:25 <sipa> multiplication is multiplication
18:25 <sipa> modulo is modulo
18:25 <glozow> b10c: not quite, see the example you worked out?
18:25 <cguida> It's 1?
18:26 <glozow> cguida: bingo!
18:26 <b10c> oh yeah, +1
18:26 <glozow> b10c: :)
18:26 <b10c> mixed up q and p
18:26 <nehan> oh. for anyone else who was wondering, g(x) is GEN in bip173, i think, and is the basis of the code. I watched the talk so I recall what properties you were looking for from that.
18:27 <sipa> pinheadmz: does this help? a polynomial mod 1 is always 0; a polynomial mod x is just its constant term; a polynomial mod x^2 is iets bottom 2 terms (i.e. a*x + b)
18:27 <glozow> okay so, if your polynomial `p(x)` ends with +1, `x⋅(p(x) - 1) + 1` also works
18:27 <sipa> pinheadmz: for other examples, a polynomial mod m(x) is subtracting as many times m(x) from it as yoh can, until you end up with something of degree less than
18:27 <sipa> m
18:28 <pinheadmz> sipa that does help
18:28 <sipa> what is 2x^2 + 3x + 2 mod x+1?
18:28 <pinheadmz> but "code(x) = f(x) * g(x) + 1  --- that's the definition of modulus" ?
18:28 <pinheadmz> sipa 3x+2 ?
18:29 <glozow> so then, let's say your polyonimal `p(x)` corresponds to string "zzp", what does `x*p(x)` correspond to?
18:29 <sipa> pinheadmz: no, you subtracted x^2, that's not a multiple of x+1
18:29 <cguida> glozow: by "works", you mean, solves the equation p(x)*g(x) = 1?
18:29 <glozow> cguida: yes
18:29 <pinheadmz> oh its just x+1 ?
18:30 <sipa> pinheadmz: no
18:30 <glozow> er, it solves `p(x) = f(x)*g(x) + 1` for some `f(x)`
18:30 <glozow> but yes same idea
18:30 <pinheadmz> sorry i can work it out later, math on IRC is making me sweat
18:30 <sipa> first subtract 2x*(x+1), you get what?
18:30 <michaelfolkson> x+2
18:30 <sipa> indeed
18:30 <cguida> whoops, yeah, i missed an f(x) haha
18:30 <sipa> what is x+2 mod x+1?
18:30 <pinheadmz> ok i see that michaelfolkson
18:31 <michaelfolkson> 1
18:31 <sipa> bingo
18:31 <sipa> so x^2 + 3x + 2 mod x+1 = 1
18:31 <michaelfolkson> Math is horrible until it clicks pinheadmz. Then it is beautiful ;)
18:31 <glozow> okie we probably should move on, heh
18:32 <glozow> How does Bech32m solve this length extension mutation issue?
18:32 <cguida> new checksum constant!
18:33 <glozow> cguida: yep!
18:33 <sipa> nehan: indeed g(x) is the generator
18:33 <cguida> i'm not sure why that fixes, other than to guess that it's because it's much larger than 1, so it doens't correspond to any of the letters
18:34 <glozow> Imma just keep chugging along with the review club questions. Moving forward, which addresses will be encoded using Bech32, and which ones with Bech32m?
18:35 <cguida> segwit v0 with bech32, subsequent versions bech32m
18:35 <pinheadmz> segwit v0 keeps bech32, everything from here on out (starting with taproot, witness v1) will get bech32m
18:35 <glozow> cguida: pinheadmz: correct!
18:35 <sipa> cguida: the specific change doesn't work anymore, because to do the same, you'd need to (a) subtract the new constant (b) multiply by a power of x (c) add the constant again... if you work that out, you'll see that it requires changing many more characters changed, due to the new constant having many more nonzero coefficients
18:35 <glozow> How does this affect the compatibility of existing software clients?
18:35 <cguida> glozow: it doesn't!
18:36 <cguida> hopefully haha
18:36 <b10c> Does not affect it: v0 does not change and v1 likely doesn't exist yet
18:36 <pinheadmz> existing, assuming no one has implemented taproot wallets yet using bech32 ...?
18:36 <b10c> v1 clients*
18:36 <sipa> pinheadmz: if they did, not for mainnet i hope!
18:36 <michaelfolkson> pinheadmz: Assuming there are no problems with bech32m (which hopefully and most likely will be the case)
18:36 <AnthonyRonning> so anyone that can send to a native segwit address can send to bech32m by default?
18:36 <cguida> sipa: ahh cool, so it's sort of unpredictable what letters would need to change in order to keep the same checksum
18:37 <pinheadmz> although sipa if i gave you a witness v1 bech32 address an old wallet would still be able to send to that address right?
18:37 <cguida> sipa: and it would be multiple letters rather than just a single q
18:37 <sipa> pinheadmz: yes, but also any miner could steal it
18:37 <glozow> AnthonyRonning: they must, if it's v1+
18:37 <pinheadmz> before activation yah
18:38 <AnthonyRonning> glozow: cool, good to know!
18:38 <pinheadmz> but after lockin, a wallet that doesnt know about bech32m would still work?
18:38 <pinheadmz> just a version byte and data, assuming there were no actual length attacks against you
18:38 <sipa> pinheadmz: yes, but nobody will be creating bech32 v1+ addresses
18:38 <sipa> so that's not a concern
18:38 <pinheadmz> ok
18:39 <michaelfolkson> A wallet either recognizes SegWit v1 or it doesn't. bech32m is just encoding for SegWit v1 addresses
18:39 <pinheadmz> well, i did send this one a few months ago https://blockstream.info/address/bc1pqyqszqgpqyqszqgpqyqszqgpqyqszqgpqyqszqgpqyqszqgpqyqs3wf0qm
18:39 <pinheadmz> ;-)
18:39 <glozow> Let's dive into code :) How does `Decode` check whether an address is encoded as Bech32 or Bech32m? Can a string be valid in both formats?
18:39 <glozow> link to code: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/bech32.cpp#L168
18:40 <sipa> cguida: yeah... though there could be many more or less similar types of mutations with different constants; the bech32m constant was chosen by searching through many patterns of classes of mutations, and picking one that prevents most
18:40 <b10c> so would the current signet explorer does encode v1 addresses as v0: https://explorer.bc-2.jp/address/tb1p85lx6qpdvs4vlpjnhnexhqwmuetd7klc3dk4ggsmycrtc78n6nnqg2u5a8    would that break?
18:40 <cguida> glozow: i wasn't clear on this. it appears to be something in "polymod"
18:41 <b10c> - would*
18:41 <michaelfolkson> glozow: A string cannot be valid in both formats. Just looking at the code
18:41 <cguida> and i hear that it's impossible to have an address be both valid bech32 and bech32m
18:41 <amiti> it can't be valid in both formats, you can xor with 1 / the new constant (`0x2bc830a3`) to see if you get the checksum
18:42 <AnthonyRonning> wait so wallets/clients that do checksum checks before sending won't be able to send to a bech32m check until they update their encoding methods?
18:42 <cguida> michaelfolkson: where do you see that in the code?
18:42 <glozow> amiti: winner! yep, you basically check the mod and see which encoding it matches
18:42 <AnthonyRonning> s/encoding/decoding
18:43 <lightlike> it's in VerifyChecksum() - looks like you get the constant back
18:43 <michaelfolkson> cguida: I just know that from other reading (BIP etc)
18:43 <glozow> michaelfolkson: cguida: amiti: yes, the mod can't be both 1 and 0x2bc830a3
18:43 <sipa> b10c: indeed, existing explorers show bech32 instead of bech32m for v1+... one reason why it'd nice to get bip350 implemented and adopted soon *hint* *hint*
18:44 <glozow> Next question, when I was reviewing the PR I found it peculiar that there was a space in this test: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/835ff6b8568291870652ca0d33d934039e7b84a8/src/test/bech32_tests.cpp#L80
18:44 <glozow> and then I realized it's not on accident ;)
18:45 <glozow> so what's the space for?
18:45 <michaelfolkson> sipa: In the case they didn't.... and Taproot was to activate... I guess just temporarily it would suck for SegWit v1 lookups. But they would probably implement it without any need for hints?!
18:45 <cguida> glozow: would love to see what the proof of that is
18:45 <lightlike> would it be possible (with a near-zero probability) that we want to decode a BECH32M, have a wrong checksum, but get back a valid BECH32 encoding instead of Encoding::INVALID?
18:46 <michaelfolkson> sipa: I get it makes sense to be merged into Core soon though
18:46 <nehan> glowzow: space is not a valid character, right? but someone may copy/paste an address and get spaces
18:46 <glozow> lightlike: I wondered this too :O maybe sipa has an answer?
18:46 <sipa> lightlike: yes, but if that mismatches the expected code for the version number, it'll still be rejected
18:46 <glozow> nehan: yep!
18:47 <glozow> space is 0x20 in US-ASCII
18:47 <glozow> which is not a valid character in the HRP
18:47 <sipa> if you get a v0 with BECH32M: bad
18:47 <michaelfolkson> I don't know what a space represents in base32 or bech32. Invalid character, so it gets ignored? Or causes an error?
18:47 <sipa> michaelfolkson: invalid
18:47 <glozow> michaelfolkson: it's invalid
18:47 <nehan> michaelfolkson: error
18:47 <sipa> but why is the test there then?
18:48 <sipa> if you get v1+ with BECH32: bad
18:48 <jnewbery> I was expecting to see a test for the same string without the space being valid
18:48 <sipa> jnewbery: that'd be a good testcase too
18:48 <nehan> jnewbery: that seems better!
18:48 <sipa> why not both?
18:49 <sipa> this test also does something useful :)
18:49 <nehan> sipa: if the data-space is not a valid address, then it might be failing because of that, and not because of the space
18:49 <cguida> to make sure an error is thrown when a space is included
18:49 <nehan> but sure both!
18:49 <sipa> nehan: yes, but this test tests something similar
18:50 <sipa> both are trying to anticipate a particular mistake an implementer might make
18:50 <sipa> yours is: implementer accepts the space but ignores it
18:50 <glozow> it's particularly testing that the HRP can't have a space?
18:50 <cguida> in case the address is sent in parts, or with newlines or something
18:50 <b10c> why does L81 and L82 in the tests contain strings with "" in the middle? i.e. "\x7f""1g6xzxy" and "\x80""1vctc34",
18:50 <sipa> glozow: yes, but in combimation with something else
18:51 <sipa> b10c: that's just how you add unprintable characters inside a string
18:51 <sipa> glozow: i think here it's assuming the implementer treats the space as a valid HRP
18:51 <b10c> sipa: ty!
18:51 <sipa> (with value 32)
18:51 <cguida> what's hrp? sorry
18:52 <glozow> cguida: human readable part
18:52 <cguida> human readable part?
18:52 <glozow> yeah
18:52 <cguida> cool
18:52 <glozow> like "bc" or "bcrt" or "tb"
18:52 <glozow> = bitcoin, bitcoin regtest, testnet bitcoin
18:52 <glozow> (i assume)
18:53 <nehan> sipa: (this is super pedantic sorry) i think space+valid is better because it reduces the reasons why the test might fail to the one you're checking for. ok, space+invalid might happen too (you copied off by 1) but the reader of the test might not realize that space+invalid might fail even if space+valid passes, and maybe in the future someone redoes the tests and misses that.
18:53 <glozow> also cguida: note that newline is a different character from space, although also invalid
18:53 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Right https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/100508/can-you-break-down-what-data-is-encoded-into-a-bech32-address
18:54 <michaelfolkson> Signet is tb as well
18:54 <cguida> glozow: true, i was picturing a scenario in which the address is sent with newlines, and the user replaces them with a space thinking they need to be separate? really stretching here haha
18:54 <jnewbery> maybe it'd be good to add a test that a valid test vector with a trailing space fails
18:55 <MarcoFalke> jnewbery: I think we have that one already
18:55 <nehan> also my concern above could easily be fixed with comments.
18:55 <MarcoFalke> (oh, maybe we don't)
18:55 <sipa> nehan: i don"t understand why one is better than the other?
18:56 <sipa> they both test distinct failures
18:56 <b10c> MarcoFalke: don't see one
18:56 <sipa> non-overlapping ones
18:56 <glozow> Last question before we wrap up: Is Bech32 case-sensitive?
18:56 <nehan> since we're close to the end i have a question: addresses are 10 characters longer now, meaning there's more chance for a user to make a mistake. did anyone think about how to balance the # of errors detected vs. likelihood of mistake?
18:56 <glozow> (and Bech32m)
18:56 <michaelfolkson> Anyone want to add a PR to add a test for trailing space? If not I'm happy to do it
18:56 <eoin> no
18:56 <maqusat> no, but mixed case is not accepted
18:56 <emzy> ni
18:56 <emzy> no
18:57 <cguida> sipa: ahh, i see it. it's to test that p2pkh addresses with a leading space are invalid
18:57 <pinheadmz> it is kinda, mixed case is not allowed
18:57 <emzy> No, because it ends up in smaller QR codes.
18:57 <michaelfolkson> Oh it isn't merged yet, so it would be a PR to sipa's branch
18:57 <pinheadmz> and sadly many exchanges dont accept ALL CAPS bech32 addresses
18:57 <glozow> I suppose it depends on what you mean by case-sensitive, but I like maqusat's and pinheadmz's answer
18:57 <pinheadmz> even though qr codes are better
18:57 <glozow> you can't have mixed case
18:57 <glozow> but both uppercase and lowercase versions are acceptable
18:58 <pinheadmz> (btw did u know Ethereum uses MiXeD cAsE as its checksum? yeesh)
18:58 <glozow> hahahahaha
18:59 <pinheadmz> clever for backwards compatability but o_O ?!
18:59 <nehan> sipa: i am predicting a future reader of the tests might miss that they test different things and think the two tests are redundant
18:59 <glozow> Alrighty that wraps up our Bech32m program for today, I hope everybody learned something! ^_^
18:59 <glozow> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
