---
layout: pr
date: 2021-05-19
title: "Increase OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES to 100"
pr: 18418
authors: [fjahr]
components: ["wallet"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: e6fe1c3
---

## Notes

* The way our wallet constructs transactions over time can leak information
  about its contents.  The most obvious example is we can assume that all UTXOs
  sent to the same scriptPubKey are controlled by the same person. UTXOs sent to
  different addresses may also be linked if they are spent together (a common
  heuristic used in chain analysis).  Thus, if we're not careful, observant
  attackers can link addresses to estimate our wallet balance and, if any one of
  our addresses is deanonymized (e.g. we send it to an exchange, merchant, or
  block explorer that knows our personal information or IP address), we might
  accidentally reveal how much money we have!

* The Bitcoin Core wallet implements a few best-practice privacy techniques.
  One is avoiding the reuse of addresses when creating an invoice or change
  address.  Another is grouping UTXOs into
  [OutputGroups](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9/src/wallet/coinselection.h#L72)
  by scriptPubKey and running coin selection on the groups rather than individual
  UTXOs.

* However, each `OutputGroup` can grow quite large. It might
  not make sense to fund a 0.015 BTC transaction by sweeping a group of 150 inputs
  worth 10 BTC (not to mention the extra fees for all the unnecessary inputs).
  The `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` constant limits the number of UTXOs per
  `OutputGroup`.

  - Within `GroupOutputs()`, if we have more than
    `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` with the same scriptPubKey, we batch them
    into multiple `OutputGroup`s with up to `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` UTXOs each.
    If we are excluding "partial groups," we won't use non-full
    `OutputGroup`s in coin selection.

* [PR#18418](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418) increases
  `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` from 10 to 100. The number 100 was suggested
  during a [previous review club](/17824.html#l-339).
  This behavior change constitutes just one line (and some adjustments to the
  tests), but it is ripe with opportunities to explore how coin selection works.

* Try adding some log statements, re-compiling and then re-running the tests
  (hint: you can use `test/functional/combine_logs.py` to see logs, and you
  assert that your logs are printed by adding `with
  node.assert_debug_log(expected_msg=[your_log_statement])` to the functional
  test).

  - Some good tests to play around with are `wallet_avoidreuse.py` and
    `wallet_groups.py`.
  - The PR author, fjahr, has written an excellent [guide to
    debugging Bitcoin Core](https://github.com/fjahr/debugging_bitcoin) with some
    hints on adding logging and using debuggers.
  - You can also tinker with some of the constants (maybe poke around for
    off-by-one errors) and see if things break!

* You may find some previous review clubs helpful:

  - Review Club [#17824](/17824) discussed the `avoid_reuse` flag.
  - Review Clubs [#17331](/17331) and [#17526](/17526) discussed coin
    selection.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. What do the `avoid_reuse` wallet flag and `-avoidpartialspends` wallet
   option do? Why might we want one to automatically turn on the other?

3. If your wallet has 101 UTXOs of 0.01 BTC each, all sent to the same
   scriptPubKey, and tries to send a payment of 0.005 BTC, avoiding partial
   spends, how many inputs will the resulting transaction have (Hint: this is
   almost exactly the `test_full_destination_group_is_preferred` test case in
   wallet\_avoidreuse.py).

4. In that test case, what is the fee amount paid for the 0.5 BTC transaction?
   (Hint: try `import pdb; pdb.set_trace()` and call the
   [gettransaction](https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/rpc/gettransaction.html)
   RPC).

5. Can you have multiple UTXOs under the same address if you set
   `avoid_reuse=true`?

6. What are the advantages, disadvantages, and potential risks to users of
   increasing `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES`?

7. What do you think of increasing `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` to 100,
   specifically?

8. For the purpose of coin selection, what's the difference between
   [`CoinEligibilityFilter.include_partial_groups`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda/src/wallet/coinselection.h#L65)
   and
   [`CoinSelectionParams.avoid_partial_spends`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/241e1416/src/wallet/wallet.h#L618)?

   (Hint: `m_avoid_partial_spends` becomes `separate_coins` in `GroupOutputs()`)

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
19:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR Review Club everybody!!!
19:00 <jnewbery> hello!
19:00 <marqusat> hi
19:00 <dunxen> hello!
19:00 <jasan> hi!
19:00 <michaelfolkson> woop woop
19:00 <lightlike> hi
19:00 <emzy> hi
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:00 <prayank> hi
19:00 <glozow> Today we're looking at a wallet PR again, #18418: Increase OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES to 100
19:00 <murch> Hi
19:00 <ivanacostarubio> Hello
19:00 <fjahr> hi
19:00 <glozow> Notes in the usual place: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418
19:00 <lukaz> Hi
19:00 <dariusp> hi
19:00 <AnthonyRonning> hello
19:01 <glozow> oo wonderful! we have fjahr and murch :) helloooo
19:01 <b10c> hi
19:01 <glozow> Did anyone get a chance to review the PR? y/n
19:01 <jnewbery> y
19:01 <lukaz> y
19:01 <dariusp> y
19:01 <marqusat> y
19:01 <michaelfolkson> y
19:01 <jasan> n
19:01 <emzy> n
19:01 <willcl_ark> hi
19:01 <AnthonyRonning> n
19:01 <larryruane___> hi ... y
19:01 <lightlike> y
19:01 <prayank> y
19:01 <fjahr> n :) (as in reading the notes. sorry, I didn't have time to prepare at all)
19:02 <ivanacostarubio> n
19:02 <murch> y
19:02 <b10c> n
19:02 <murch> glozow: That was the PR, not the notes?
19:02 <glozow> For those who did review, what was your approach? Did anybody try the tips from the notes or fjahr's debugging doc?
19:02 <glozow> murch: yes, the PR
19:03 <jasan> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418 is the correct URL
19:03 <glozow> oops, my bad. yes. that's the link to the pr
19:03 <lukaz> I've never done this before and the guide to debugging bitcoin core was so helpful
19:03 <glozow> notes are here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/18418
19:04 <michaelfolkson> I followed some of your hints glozow. I've seen fjar's excellent doc before
19:04 <glozow> okie, let's start light. Can anyone tell me what the `avoid_reuse` wallet flag and `-avoidpartialspends` wallet option do?
19:04 <michaelfolkson> *fjahr
19:04 <fjahr> It needs some cleaning up, please ping me if you have feedback on the debugging doc, PRs welcome :D
19:04 <glozow> lukaz: that's awesome!
19:04 <prayank> avoid_reuse: avoid spending utxo associated with an address that was already used in a transaction earlier
19:05 <prayank> avoidpartialspends: create groups of utxos and order them by address
19:05 <lukaz> `avoid_reuse`: exclude utxos with previous scriptPubKey
19:05 <lukaz> partialspends use GroupOutputs instead of individual UTXOs. (Group UTXOs by scriptPubKey)
19:06 <glozow> prayank: lukaz: good answers. what's the purpose of doing these two things?
19:06 <lightlike> avoid = forbid or more in the sense "we'll try our best not to reuse but will if necessary"?
19:06 <lukaz> Privacy mostly
19:06 <glozow> we always do coin selection on `OutputGroups` - if we're not doing `avoidpartialspends` we just give each UTXO its own group
19:06 <glozow> (just to clarify)
19:06 <lukaz> glozow: right.
19:07 <prayank> glozow: Purpose: Improve Privacy
19:07 <glozow> great! and if you have `-avoidpartialspends` turned off, does that mean coin selection will
19:07 <glozow> definitely not try to group outputs by spk?
19:08 <murch> lightl
19:08 <glozow> lightlike: i believe it's "forbid"
19:08 <prayank> tbh coin selection can do weird things so I am not sure :)
19:08 <murch> lightlike: It will literally never use UTXOs with a previously reused scriptPubKey when avoid_reuse is on
19:09 <lukaz> If it's off, then as you said every UTXO gets its own group
19:09 <murch> You could of course still spend them manually via coin control or raw transactions
19:09 <michaelfolkson> murch: So it will fail to construct a transaction?
19:09 <glozow> not too weird. if you have `-avoidpartialspends` off, coin selection might try both and pick the cheaper one
19:09 <murch> michaelfolkson: If there are no other funds, I think it would
19:10 <michaelfolkson> murch: And it will relay that back to the user? Try turning avoid_reuse off?
19:10 <glozow> Let's try a motivating example for the PR. Today (with `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` = 10), if you have `avoid_reuse` and `avoidpartialspends` and a group of 15 UTXOs to the same scriptPubKey, what happens if you spend 10 of them but not the other 5 in a transaction?
19:10 <fjahr> michaelfolkson: yeah, otherwise privacy is at stake, so that seems to be the right UX
19:11 <murch> michaelfolkson: Presumably there would be an "insufficient funds" message, I don't know whether the avoided reused addresses get mentioned. Would doubt it
19:12 <glozow> yeah. reused coins don't get returned by `AvailableCoins`, but we don't know until later that those coins aren't enough to cover the payment
19:12 <michaelfolkson> glozow: That's fine? The limit is 10 before this PR?
19:12 <fjahr> you also have this reflected in you balances, so it should not come at too much of a surprise
19:12 <glozow> michaelfolkson: what do you mean?
19:13 <glozow> oh let me clarify the question
19:13 <lightlike> I think the 5 coins will never be used again in avoid_reuse mode.
19:13 <michaelfolkson> glozow: I don't understand your question, sorry :)
19:13 <glozow> the transaction spending the 10 UTXOs will be fine, yes. but what happens to the other 5 UTXOs?
19:13 <glozow> lightlike: yes!
19:14 <glozow> the address will be marked dirty
19:14 <lightlike> will the 5 coins be reflected in the balance?
19:14 <glozow> not if you, say, `getbalance(avoid_reuse=True)`
19:14 <lukaz> if (!allow_used_addresses && IsSpentKey(wtxid, i)) will filter out the other 5
19:15 <prayank> any way to check dirty addresses in a wallet?
19:15 <jnewbery> ... but you can override that and spend the dirty coins by setting avoid_reuse = false in the rpc call
19:15 <dariusp> Would it make sense in this situation to try to pick the most valuable coins in the group? So that you minimize the value of the dirty coins
19:15 <glozow> or `listunspent(avoid_reuse=True)`
19:15 <glozow> lukaz: yes!
19:15 <prayank> glowzow: Thanks
19:15 <glozow> dariusp: i suppose, but i believe we construct the groups randomly
19:16 <glozow> jnewbery: ye, the `WALLET_FLAG_AVOID_REUSE` flag makes the wallet mark destinations "dirty" after they've been
19:16 <glozow> used already. and you pass in `avoid_reuse` on a per-call basis i believe
19:17 <glozow> Notice that setting `avoid_reuse` automatically turns on `avoidpartialspends`. Why do we want that?
19:17 <fjahr> dariusp: I think I thought about something like that before but it also has privacy implications
19:18 <glozow> (what would happen in this situation with the 15 UTXOs if we didn't avoid partial spends but did `avoid_reuse`?)
19:18 <dariusp> @jnewberry because otherwise we would automatically be creating dirty addresses if we only spent some UTXOs with the same spk
19:18 <murch> Because we'd otherwise mark all other UTXOs in the group as dirty whenever we pick as single
19:18 <lukaz> If addresses are to be used only once, then we should use all UTXOs
19:18 <glozow> murch: jup
19:19 <murch> :s/as single/a single one/
19:19 <glozow> lukaz: yeah! and the idea of this PR is "hey, might not be enough to sweep all of them"
19:19 <glozow> 10 might not be enough*
19:20 <michaelfolkson> glozow: So in this example we'd have 100 inputs and 2 outputs?
19:20 <michaelfolkson> (in question 3)
19:20 <lukaz> glozow: ahh thanks for the explanation. Things are coming together
19:20 <glozow> michaelfolkson: we're not there yet, but we can move on to this question
19:20 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Oh sorry
19:20 <glozow> If your wallet has 101 UTXOs of 0.01 BTC each, all sent to the same scriptPubKey, and tries to
19:20 <glozow>    send a payment of 0.005 BTC, avoiding partial spends and partial groups, how many inputs will the
19:20 <glozow> resulting transaction have?
19:21 <glozow> (btw this is with PR#18418)
19:21 <prayank> michaelfolkson: 100 inputs 2 outputs with 2 exceptions.
19:21 <marqusat> 100
19:21 <prayank> Exceptions:
19:21 <prayank> A. If custom change address is used (any address that was not created with `getrawchangeaddress` RPC in the same wallet), replacement tx will have 101 inputs
19:21 <prayank> B. If custom change address is used with label (address that was created with `getrawchangeaddress` and label was set with `setlabel` RPC), replacement tx will have 101 inputs
19:22 <glozow> marqusat: how did you arrive at the answer 100? :)
19:22 <michaelfolkson> prayank: Cool, missed the exceptions
19:23 <marqusat> glozow: we want to avoid_partial_spends and max output group is 100
19:23 <prayank> Only valid if RBF is used and custom change address
19:23 <lightlike> in that case we'd have two output groups, one with 100utxos and one with 1 utxos. Does the coin selection algorithm always choose the bigger output group if both output groups would be viable for the tx?
19:24 <glozow> marqusat: right!
19:24 <glozow> and lightlike has the other part of the explanation
19:24 <murch> glozow: 10, because my wallet doesn't have #18418 yet
19:25 <glozow> if the group with 100 is enough to cover the transaction, we'll probably only use that one
19:25 <fjahr> ligthlike: yes, full groups are preferred
19:25 <glozow> murch: i said with #18418
19:25 <murch> lightlike: Yes, it avoids partial groups when possible
19:25 <glozow> ooo right! if the group with 100 is enough, we'll _definitely_ just return that one
19:25 <lukaz> Yes. I believe include_partial_groups controls that
19:25 <glozow> thanks fjahr and murch
19:26 <fjahr> :)
19:26 <glozow> this might be a good time to ask the question: what's the difference between partial spends and partial groups?
19:26 <glozow> they sound very similar i got them confused for so long :'(
19:27 <michaelfolkson> Part spending a UTXO versus spending a subset of UTXOs in a group?
19:27 <murch> glozow: I think that a partial group refers to a group that isn't full in the presence of full groups. I.e. if you had 105 UTXOs, the group with 5 would be a partial group since a full group exists
19:28 <lukaz> a partial group is an OutputGroup with less than `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES`. A partial spend is when only some UTXOs from a spk are used to fund a tx
19:28 <lightlike> wouldn't this example be a partial spend then, even with avoid_partialspends set?
19:29 <glozow> murch: lukaz: ya! so in initial coin selection attempts when we're excluding partial groups, we'll only include the group with 100. if we had a group of just 2, though (not 102), we wouldn't consider that a partial group
19:29 <murch> lightlike: Yes, but with a mitigated privacy impact, now it's only two transactions that would have the same address used rather than 105
19:29 <murch> lukaz: It's only a partial group if a full group exists
19:29 <glozow> lightlike: right, so i assume that's why fjahr has updated the helpstring to say "Group outputs by address, selecting many (possibly all) or none"
19:30 <lukaz> murch: ahh, yes, I see that in the code
19:30 <lukaz> murch: `groups_per_spk.size() > 1`
19:30 <fjahr> yepp
19:31 <murch> lukaz: exactly
19:31 <lightlike> murch: but the naming is certainly confusing if avoid_reuse is a strict no-go for reusing, and avoid_partialspends just means "we'll try our best"
19:31 <glozow> link to code we're discussing: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e6fe1c37d0a2f8037996dd80619d6c23ec028729/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L4240
19:31 <murch> lightlike: Granted
19:31 <glozow> lightlike: hm i agree
19:31 <lukaz> glozow: sorry I'll send links instead of snippets from now on
19:32 <glozow> lukaz: no worries! :) thanks for citing code!
19:32 <glozow> alrighty, let's discuss a small disadvantage of increasing the output group limit
19:33 <glozow> let's look at this test: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/d4c409cf09d02d3978b590ebdc55ff50f9938d3e/test/functional/wallet_avoidreuse.py#L317-L346
19:33 <glozow> which essentially tests the scenario we were just talking about, with 101 UTXOs to an address
19:33 <glozow> did anyone poke around for the fee amount paid by this transaction?
19:34 <prayank> I think you have mentioned it in review
19:34 <prayank> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418/commits/8f073076b102b77897e5a025ae555baae3d1f671#r632989577
19:34 <michaelfolkson> glozow: I wasn't sure whether you meant before it changed to 100 or after it changed to 100
19:34 <michaelfolkson> 0.5 BTC suggested the test before fjahr made the change (I think)
19:35 <glozow> prayank: yeah. can get the answer by doing the exercise or reading the review comments, either way i don't mind
19:35 <lukaz> Not sure if I did it right, but I got 0.0013 BTC
19:35 <glozow> wasn't sure how helpful it was to put exercises in the review notes
19:36 <glozow> lukaz: i got the same thing! :D 0.00136966 BTC.
19:36 <michaelfolkson> It should be 0.005 BTC quoted in the question and not 0.5 BTC right?
19:36 <lukaz> glozow: It helped me quite a bit
19:36 <glozow> michaelfolkson: 0.5 is the amount sent in the test
19:36 <glozow> 0.005 is in the exercise i suppose
19:36 <michaelfolkson> prayank: Good practice to do debugging exercises rather than copying glozow :)
19:37 <glozow> lukaz: okay whew, i'm glad it wasn't total garbage 😅
19:37 <prayank> michaelfolkson: lol
19:37 <glozow> uhoh, flashbacks to grade school
19:38 <glozow> Ok so can we summarize: What are the advantages, disadvantages, and potential risks to users of increasing
19:38 <glozow>    `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES`?
19:38 <marqusat> +better forward privacy -higher tx fee
19:39 <murch> marqusat: but you'll have to spend the fees for the inputs eventually anyway
19:39 <lukaz> -perhaps 10 is easier to debug than 100 but this is very minor
19:39 <murch> So, I'd say yes, if this output group happened to get picked at a high feereate
19:39 <glozow> marqusat: great! i like to think of it as higher short-term fees
19:40 <murch> if the transaction happened to get built at a really low feerate, it might be a fortunate consolidatory outcome
19:40 <glozow> yeah. if you're at a high-ish feerate because you want to make a transaction now, you'll pay more in fees for those UTXOs. it might also cost more to fee-bump
19:40 <marqusat> murch: yep though fees will be likely going up with increased adoption
19:40 <fjahr> To me, it's not really a downside, just how bitcoin works, unless people really don't know what they are doing :)
19:40 <murch> Well, just last week we had a few days of 2 sat/vB going thru ;)
19:41 <michaelfolkson> You would want to turn it off (or back to 10) in a high fee environment. But an informed user could change the code to do that
19:41 <glozow> but money-wise, you might win because you won't have a situation where you're throwing away UTXOs from the combination of `avoid_reuse` and `-avoidpartialspends`?
19:41 <murch> michaelfolkson: better yet, you'd just avoid that group at high fees
19:41 <jnewbery> murch: am I right in saying that it's advantageous to branch and bound to have more UTXOs rather than fewer, since it'll be more likely to find a solution that results in no change?
19:41 <murch> yes
19:42 <lukaz> That's why we are increasing it I believe
19:42 <lukaz> Not only that, but one of the reasons
19:42 <dariusp> yeah, if you're concerned enough about privacy to not want to use a dirty UTXO, wouldn't you rather just spend it? So by that logic it seems like you'd rather not have any limit?
19:42 <murch> Especially if the UTXOs have a variance of values
19:42 <glozow> oh hm, so having more `OutputGroup`s to pick from might give us more BnB solutions?
19:43 <glozow> dariusp: yeah, i had that thought too! basically we want it to be high enough so that we'd sweep everything in most cases right?
19:43 <lukaz> Oh so maybe this will give less solutions with branch and bound? Because this will cause less `OutputGroups` to be generated
19:43 <murch> The restriction of a barrel of UTXOs only being permitted to be spent as a group definitely restricts the combination space for viable input sets
19:43 <murch> But, I think that the whole scenario is extremely unlikely anyway
19:43 <michaelfolkson> Trade-offs, trade-offs everywhere gif
19:44 <glozow> right, we'd have fewer `OutputGroup`s and higher total amounts in each one
19:44 <glozow> sooooo what if your whole wallet was UTXOs to 1 address?
19:44 <murch> If you use avoid_reuse/avoid_partial_spend, you'd hopefully not be getting dozens of UTXO to the same address
19:44 <glozow> i guess maybe you'd wait for a really low fee, turn it on, and make a payment?
19:45 <lightlike> in some cases like public donation addresses it's hard to avoid
19:45 <murch> glozow: Spend it all in a low feerate transaction and split it into some well-distributed different amounts on multiple addresses
19:45 <glozow> murch: makes sense to me
19:46 <murch> lightlike: If you have a donation address, that should perhaps be a separate wallet, or then avoid_reuse simply prevents the intermingling of funds until you manually sweep the donations
19:46 <dariusp> @murch why would you want to pre-emptively split it into different addresses?
19:47 <glozow> So back to dariusp's point on "why have a limit at all?" What `OUTPUT_GROUP_MAX_ENTRIES` would be too high? What do you think of 100, specifically?
19:47 <fjahr> dariusp: It give better options to the branch and bound algorithm to find inputs that exactly match the output
19:47 <glozow> dariusp: i supppose in those cases, it's ambiguous if you're consolidating them to yourself or you're grouping them to make a payment to someone else, so it's fine to split?
19:47 <murch> dariusp: because you could do that in advance at low fees, consolidate all your UTXOs in a single group into say three pieces, and when you later want to spend at high fees, you only need to use one of the three
19:48 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Intuitively it seems high. 100 inputs seems *large*. We wanted more than 10 and 100 was the next order of magnitude?
19:48 <glozow> oh oops pre-emptively split, ignore what i said haha
19:48 <dariusp> murch hmm, maybe im missing something but wouldn't you end up creating more change outputs in total (unless you got really lucky)
19:49 <murch> dariusp: Ah, because we still don't want to reveal our full balance every time we do a transaction
19:49 <dariusp> murch ah okay. It's almost like a pseudo coinjoin? lol
19:49 <glozow> michaelfolkson: idk. we saw earlier that you could maybe pay 0.0013BTC in fees on a tx. would that be acceptable to a user who has opted in to `-avoidpartialspends`?
19:49 <murch> Also, if you only have a single UTXO, when you spend from it, all of your funds are in flight and you can only make child transactions depending on this unconfirmed tx
19:50 ⚡ michaelfolkson shrugs
19:51 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Don't know
19:51 <murch> dariusp: Yeah, you could even use a native and a wrapped segwit address among the ones you pay, so chainalysis thinks its different wallets.
19:51 <dariusp> very interesting
19:52 <michaelfolkson> 50 instead of 100? :)
19:52 <michaelfolkson> Shedpaint
19:53 <murch> glozow: It's a bit arbitrary. 42 might have been enough as well. Maybe 200 wouldn't be too bad. I'd firmly support 100 as being better than 10, tho
19:53 <glozow> murch: what evidence do we have that 10 isn't enough?
19:53 <dariusp> glozow i guess then the question around picking 100 specifically depends on who bitcoind is being built for? Someone who was super concerned with privacy or fees should probably be doing things more manually?
19:54 <emzy> 42 sounds like a valid answer ;)
19:54 <murch> glozow: I have none. We have almost zero user data on Bitcoin Core usage.
19:54 <glozow> right, i don't think there's a way for users to be using `-avoidpartialspends` unintentionally
19:54 <michaelfolkson> Where has 42 come from?
19:54 <michaelfolkson> Or is that a joke? RNG?
19:54 <lightlike> Are utxos with a negative effective feerate also included in the tx if they belong to the same output group, meaning that the absolute cost of the tx is higher compared to by simply dropping them?
19:55 <jasan> michaelfolkson: Hitchhickers Guide To The Galaxy
19:55 <prayank> dariusp: Manually? Use coincontrol?
19:55 <fjahr> dariusp: yeah, doing everything manually is always the last resort for people who want full control. This option give a more conveninet option that is at least helpful to most people with reused addresses and privacy concerns.
19:55 <emzy> michaelfolkson: murch said that 42 might bee enough.
19:55 <dariusp> prayank yeah i think so
19:55 <murch> lightlike: Excellent question, they are not getting included for BnB, but are getting included for Knapsack currently
19:56 <michaelfolkson> For the ultra privacy conscious there are privacy wallets Wasabi, Joinmarket, Samourai
19:56 <glozow> lightlike: good question. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/326db920e24736581d0eb2ce555771c57101dc1b/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L4233 if we want positive_only we don't put them in groups
19:56 <glozow> er, it's filtered on the per-UTXO level in `GroupOutputs`
19:56 <glozow> i wonder if we could just... use the size of the largest group? o.O
19:57 <glozow> er, the number of UTXOs attributed to a spk
19:57 <dariusp> glozow would that be the same as not having a limit?
19:57 <glozow> dariusp: oh true, yeah 😅
19:58 <prayank> michaelfolkson: That would support the arguments some people make "Core devs do not care about privacy"
19:58 <michaelfolkson> No limit is a DoS vector right?
19:58 <lightlike> glozow: but your link refers to the "separate_coins" section not, the actual grouping one
19:58 <glozow> why would it be a DoS vector...?
19:58 <murch> michaelfolkson: It's a footgun
19:59 <glozow> lightlike: oops sorry! i'm bad with links today. it's below: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/326db920e24736581d0eb2ce555771c57101dc1b/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L4292
19:59 <michaelfolkson> prayank: When there are trade-offs it isn't as simple as saying anyone doesn't care. What you gain some place you lose some other place. And users have different preferences on how to manage that trade-off
19:59 <lightlike> ah right, thanks :)
19:59 <murch> Imagine someone running a wallet off of a single address and then being like "I wonder what avoid_partial_spends" does
20:00 <michaelfolkson> I was just thinking too big transactions with thousands of inputs but I think that is prevented elsewhere
20:00 <michaelfolkson> (was covered in a PR review club a while ago I think)
20:00 <murch> Right now they might end up spending 100 inputs at 150 sat/vB, make that a thousand though, it really starts to hurt
20:00 <glozow> i think here it's not that black and white. a user could say `-avoidpartialspends=True, -maxtxfee=0.001BTC` if they want to hedge against a huge fee. and they can always create transactions and view them first without broadcasting ofc
20:00 <prayank> michaelfolkson: I understand there are tradeoffs involved but I would prefer to improve privacy in core irrespective of other wallets.
20:01 <michaelfolkson> prayank: You might. But another user might prefer to minimize transaction fees
20:01 <michaelfolkson> prayank: Neither preference is wrong
20:01 <murch> michaelfolkson: You can do something like 1450+ p2wpkh inputs in a standard tx
20:02 <larryruane___> high-level question: the Core wallet has lots of great engineering, but is it used much is real life? If not, let me guess: we care about improving the Core wallet because many wallet implementors use it as a model? (at least we hope they do)
20:02 <glozow> oh oops this discussion was getting so 🔥 i lost track of time. we've hit our 1 hour!
20:02 <glozow> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
