---
layout: default
title: "GDB tutorial notes"
author: LarryRuane
---

_These notes were written by [LarryRuane](https://github.com/LarryRuane/) to
accompany the [Review Club meeting for PR 22350](./22350) and [GDB video
tutorial](https://vimeo.com/576956296/df0b66fbfc). The original can be found on
[Larry's
gist](https://gist.github.com/LarryRuane/8c6e8de82f6e2b360ca54dd751388af6)._

# Using debuggers with Bitcoin Core

Please also refer to Fabian Jahr's
[excellent documentation](https://github.com/fjahr/debugging_bitcoin)
and [video](https://youtu.be/6aPSCDAiqVI).
In this document, I'll cover only some of what his document does in slightly greater
detail, while trying not to duplicate too much, and focused on `gdb` and Linux.

Video version of (most of) this document: https://vimeo.com/576956296/df0b66fbfc
_NOTE if you watch the video_: Near the end, I had problems attaching to
a running `bitcoind` and entering TUI mode (TUI mode is explained below). Please see the
TUI section below for the fix to this problem. (Short version: start `gdb`
with the `-tui` option.)

There are two debuggers commonly used with `bitcoind` (and the other c++ executables), `lldb`
and `gdb`. The `lldb` debugger is used on MacOS and on Linux with `clang` builds. The `gdb`
debugger is used on Linux, and can be used with either `gcc` or `clang` builds. This document
won't discuss `lldb`, but it's similar to `gdb`.

## gdb documentation

`gdb` has been around since the 1980s and has
[excellent documentation](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/).
There's so much there that I don't know; I'll
present the small subset of things I use most often.

## build with optimization disabled

Debugging with optimizations enabled (the default setting) is very difficult and confusing
because many variables can't be seen (they're "optimized out"), functions are in-lined,
loops unrolled, etc. Single-stepping gives the experience of "I wonder where we'll
go next?" So always build without optimizations:
```
$ ./configure CXXFLAGS='-O0 -g'
```
To tell if optimization is enabled, run `grep '^CXXFLAGS src/Makefile`; if you see `-O0`
then optimization is disabled.

Be careful not to make any performance measurements with optimization disabled.

### debug build shortcut

Sometimes you need to debug only a small part of the code. Instead of rebuilding everything,
you can manually change the definition of `CXXFLAGS` in `src/Makefile` so that it specifies
`-O0` instead of `-O2`, `touch` the files you want to debug, and run `make`.

## running `bitcoind` with `gdb`

There are two ways of debugging (or sometimes called controlling) a `bitcoind` instance with
`gdb`.

### starting `bitcoind` from the debugger

Make sure you're in the `src` directory (so the debugger can find source files). Run
```
gdb bitcoind
Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
(...)
Reading symbols from bitcoind...
(gdb) run
Starting program: /g/bitcoin/src/bitcoind 
[Thread debugging using libthread_db enabled]
Using host libthread_db library "/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libthread_db.so.1".
2021-07-09T21:53:44Z Bitcoin Core version v21.99.0-ea728a30665a (release build)
(...)
```
The `run` command can be abbreviated as `r` -- all `gdb` commands can be abbreviated as
long as unique. Type `help` to see a list of topics, and `help <topic>` or
`help <command>` for detailed help on that topic or command.

If you want to pass arguments to the program, just type them on the `run` command line
```
(gdb) run -regtest -debug
```
Sometimes the arguments string is rather long, so instead you can specify it
when starting `gdb` (so that way your shell history has it).
```
$ gdb --args bitcoind -regtest -debug
```
Then you only need to type `run`. If you want to change the arguments, you can
specify them on the `run` command, and they'll replace the initial ones. If you
type `run` again, the program will be run with the most recent arguments.

When you `quit` out of `gdb`, the `bitcoind` process dies too. Note that `bitcoind`
is not given a chance to shut down gracefully; it's like sending the process
a hard-kill (SIGKILL or -9). But this hasn't ever caused me problems (and
it's very good to know if this does cause problems!).

### attach to a running `bitcoind`

Rather than starting `bitcoind` from within `gdb`, you can attach to
an existing `bitcoind`. Example:
```
gdb --pid 1234
```
This will interrupt the running `bitcoind` and attach to it. It will be suspended,
so it may lose P2P connections after a minute or so, but this has never
been a problem for me. It's not possible
to affect the command line arguments. When you `quit`, the `bitcoind` continues
running.

## command recall within `gdb`

Like any modern shell, `gdb` has command history, which isn't preserved across
`gdb` sessions. Initially, it's in "emacs" mode (control-p to bring up the most
recent command, control-r to search, etc.), but typing the two keys
ESCAPE control-j silently puts it into "vi" mode. This setting doesn't persist
across (gdb) executions.

If you type just an Enter (return, empty line), `gdb` will re-execute the last
command. This is very nice for single-stepping -- type `next` or just `n`, then
return-return- etc. to step over each line, or `step` or `s` to continue to step
downward. 

## useful gdb commands

A few other important commands (the ones I use most often):

- `fini` -- finishes running the current function, printing its
return value, then stops in the debugger again
- `b` -- set a breakpoint
- `i b` -- (information about breakpoints) show breakpoints
- `d <n>` -- delete breakpoint number n
- `d` -- delete all breakpoints (it will ask you to confirm)
- `dis <n>` -- disable breakpoint n (instead of deleting it)
- `ena <n>` -- enable breakpoint n
- `dis` -- disable all breakpoints
- `ena` -- enable all breakpoints
- `until <lineno>` -- continue until the given line number is reached, then stop
(this is a temporary breakpoint)
- `c` -- continue execution (run freely)
- `bt` -- show stack trace (backtrace)
- `up`, `down`, `f<n>` -- move up and down the call stack, or go to a particular
stack frame
- `l` -- show (list) the source code around the current debugger location (then pressing
Enter will show the next few lines; `l-` shows previous lines)
- `i thr` -- (information threads) show the list of running threads with their IDs,
the `*` indicates the thread the debugger is currently attached to
- `thr <n>` -- switch to thread n (small integer)
- `thr apply all bt` -- show the stack traces of all threads
- `quit` -- quit, leave the debugger

You can set breakpoints by function name:
```
(gdb) b ConnectBlock
```
If not unique, prepend with the object name:
```
(gdb) b CChainState::ConnectBlock
```
Or set breakpoints by filename and line number:
```
(gdb) b validation.cpp:1728
```
If you set the breakpoint by function name, or if you specify
the line number of the open brace, then when `gdb` stops there,
the function arguments may not be set up correctly (will print
as garbage), so single-step (`next`) to the next line.

## command and symbol completion

Type TAB to [extend or complete the current filename, command, or symbol](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/Completion.html#Completion).

## recommended ~/.gdbinit settings

When `gdb` starts up, it opens and reads the file `.gdbinit` in your home directory
if it exists. Here you can set things you'd like all the time. Here are the
settings I use:
```
set print pretty
set logging on
set history save on
```
The `set history save on` appends your typed commands into `.gdb_history` on exit;
`set logging on` appends gdb output into `gdb.txt` as you go. 

## gdb.txt

The `gdb.txt` file is very useful; a large data structure such as
`m_chainparams.GetConsensus()` is almost 200 lines of output when printed;
it's almost impossible to find things in it by visual inspection.
But if you open `gdb.txt` in an editor after
printing something large, you can explore it in the editor (most editors let
you find matching braces and brackets, for example, or you can just search for
things). Also, you have the entire history of the state of the variables or stack
traces you've printed out, which can be great for later analysis.

Unfortunately, when you print variables, the print request that you've
typed does not go into `gdb.txt`. So if you're looking at `gdb.txt` in the
editor, you'll see the contents of variables, but may not know which they
are! A workaround I often use is to print a string just before (or after)
printing the variable, reminding myself which variable this is. For example,
```
(gdb) p "m_chainparams.GetConsensus()"
$6 = "m_chainparams.GetConsensus()"
(gdb) p m_chainparams.GetConsensus()
(... large variable ...)
```
(You can use the command history so you don't have to retype all of that.)

## GUI (TUI) mode

One of `gdb`'s lesser-known features is its built-in GUI mode. Well, it's not a
real GUI, it's a [TUI](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/TUI.html)
(text user interface). Here's [an example](https://photos.app.goo.gl/ZZj9EngPd6mZzak79).
It's best to start `gdb` in TUI mode by specifying `-tui` on the command line.
Once in `gdb`, switch between regular and TUI mode by typing the two keys control-x a.

There's one problem with TUI mode: If you don't start `gdb` with the `-tui` option,
but instead switch to TUI mode by typing control-x a, then nothing the debugger prints
gets appended to `gdb.txt`. A workaround for this is to exit TUI mode (control-x a), print the
variable or stack trace, then re-enter TUI mode (control-x a).

There also seems to be a problem with attaching to a running process without
specifying `-tui` if you then enter TUI mode by typing control-x a. The terminal
control becomes completely confused. If attaching to a running process (and
if you want to use TUI), always specify `-tui` on the command line, for example:
```
gdb --pid 1234 -tui
```
It also seems to be (at least for me) that if you start `gdb` with `-tui`, then
you can't switch out of it (control-x a). Trying to do that causes `gdb` to crash.
So you must stay in TUI mode for the entire session, but that's probably best
anyway.

If the program you're debugging prints to the terminal, the TUI display gets
completely confused (because it thinks it alone is updating the window).
Luckily, it's easy to fix, just type control-L. But, for
this reason, it's advisable to start `bitcoind` with the `-noprinttoconsole`
argument, and watch what it's doing using `tail -f ~/.bitcoin/debug.log`
in another window. Or start `bitcoind` normally and attach to it with `gdb`
from another window.

Also very helpful is
[single key mode](https://sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/TUI-Single-Key-Mode.html#TUI-Single-Key-Mode)
(enable and disable by typing control-x s) which allows you to type just a single
character to do the common things like next and step.

## Debugging unit tests

It's easy to use the debugger on unit tests, for example (still in the `src` directory):
```
$ gdb --args test/test_bitcoin --run_test=getarg_tests/logargs
(gdb) b getarg_tests::logargs::test_method
Breakpoint 1 at 0x261aa0: file test/getarg_tests.cpp, line 196.
(gdb)
```
Notice the nonobvious way the names of the test functions are constructed.

## functional (python) tests

### python breakpoints

It's often helpful to set a breakpoint in the Python test; adding this
line will set a breakpoint; the test will suspend and you will be at
the python debugger prompt (`(Pdb)`):
```
import pdb; pdb.set_trace()
```
You must run the functional test directly, rather than using `test_runner.py`.
It helps to specify `--timeout-factor 0` on the python script command line.
The python debugger is pretty basic; type `help` to see the list of
commands.

When the python test is suspended in the debugger, there generally will
be one or more `bitcoind` processes that the test has launched. To see
these, run a command like
```
$ ps alx | grep bitcoind
```
Their command line arguments show where their data directories are; it's
often use to look at their `debug.log` files. You can attach to them
with `gdb`, set breakpoints there, continue, then continue in the
python debugger.

### pretty printing python variables

Another thing useful in debugging python programs is to add these
lines near the top of the file:
```
import pprint
pp = pprint.PrettyPrinter(indent=4)
```
To print out a complicated variable such as a dictionary during the execution of the test,
add a line like:
```
pp.pprint(complicated_var)
```
This will display the variable in a much more readable format.

## a "breakpoint" hack

Sometimes you'd like to attach `gdb` to a running `bitcoind` when a certain
condition occurs at a particular code location. A weird trick is to
add code like to the code path you're interested in:
```
{ static int spin = 1; while(spin); }
```
(This can be conditioned on some state.) This acts as a hardcoded breakpoint.
When the `bitcoind` reaches this code,
it will infinite loop; when you notice (or guess) that this has happened,
you attach to the process with `gdb`, type `i thr` to see which thread is the
one you're likely interested in, then type `thr <id>`, and you should be at
this infinite loop. Then type `set var spin=0` and then you can print variables,
single-step, set breakpoints and continue, or whatever. You don't have to have
started `bitcoind` in the debugger ahead of time.

When I don't know how to cause `bitcoind` to execute a particular code path
that I'm interested in
debugging or understanding, I've set one of these "spin" landmines and then run the
entire functional test suite. When it seems to be hung, if I run `top` and see
a `bitcoind` steady at 100% CPU, I attach to it, find the right
thread, and then begin debugging. It's a hack, but this has been helpful
many times.
