---
layout: pr
date: 2021-06-30
title: "Default to NODE_WITNESS in nLocalServices"
pr: 21090
authors: [dhruv]
components: ["p2p"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: c44bac14b4
---

## Notes

- Segwit was a softfork defined in [BIP
  141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki), with
  P2P changes defined in [BIP
  144](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/65529b12bb01b9f29717e1735ce4d472ef9d9fe7/bip-0144.mediawiki).

- Segwit was activated at block 481,824 in August 2017. Prior to activation,
  some very careful testing was carried out to verify different scenarios, for
  example:

  - How are transactions and blocks relayed between unupgraded and upgraded
    nodes?
  - How do upgraded nodes find other upgraded nodes to connect to?
  - If a node is unupgraded at activation time and subsequently upgrades, how
    does it ensure that the blocks that it previously validated (without segwit
    rules) are valid according to segwit rules?

- To enable this kind of testing, [PR
  8418](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8418) made it possible to
  configure the segwit activation parameters using a `-bip9params`
  configuration option. That configuration option was later renamed to
  `-vbparams` in [PR 10463](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10463), and
  replaced with `-segwitheight` in [PR
  16060](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/16060).

- Those options allowed starting a node which would never activate segwit by
  passing `-vbparams=segwit:0:0` (or later, `-segwitheight=-1`). This was used
  in the functional tests to test the node's behavior across activation.

- The segwit mainnet activation was a one-time event. Now that segwit has been
  activated, those tests are no longer required.

- This PR removes the final tests that made use of `-segwitheight=0`. With those
  tests removed, the special casing for `-segwitheight=-1` behavior can also be
  removed. That special casing impacted logic in net\_processing, validation and
  mining.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

2. This PR removed two subtests in `p2p_segwit.py`. What are those two
   subtests? What were they testing? Why can they now be removed?

3. What does the `CNode.GetLocalServices()` method do?

4. Why is this PR able to remove several calls to `GetLocalServices()`?

5. What does the
   [`GetBlockScriptFlags()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/567670bec5ecf9bc252e91370382be53fd81ccee/src/validation.cpp#L1661)
   function do?

6. Why is it ok to always set `SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS` when `SCRIPT_VERIFY_P2SH`
   is set? (This isn't immediately obvious and will require some code/github
   archaeology!)

7. What does
   [`GenerateCoinbaseCommitment()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/567670bec5ecf9bc252e91370382be53fd81ccee/src/validation.cpp#L3125)
   do? Why is ok to remove the `consensusParams.SegwitHeight` check in that function?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 < jnewbery> #startmeeting
17:00 < jnewbery> hello! Welcome to PR Review Club. Feel free to say hi to let people know you're here.
17:00 < glozow> hi
17:00 < schmidty> hi
17:00 < sriramdvt> hi
17:00 < dergoegge> hallo
17:01 < lightlike> hi
17:01 < emzy> hi
17:01 < gite> hi
17:01 < svav> hi
17:01 < jnewbery> Is anyone here for the first time?
17:01 < gite> yes sir
17:01 < glozow> welcome gite!
17:01 < jnewbery> gite: welcome!
17:01 < jnewbery> as usual, the notes and questions are here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/21090
17:01 < gite> Excited to be here!! thanks
17:02 < jnewbery> I'll use the questions to prompt conversation, but if you have an observation or question of your own, feel free to jump in at any time. Don't be shy!
17:02 < jnewbery> who had a chance to review the PR / read the notes & questions? (y/n)
17:02 < emzy> n
17:03 < dergoegge> ~y
17:03 < gite> n
17:03 < svav> y
17:03 < lightlike> y, some weeks ago though
17:03 < sriramdvt> read the notes - y
17:03 < jnewbery> lightlike: I saw you left some review comments and found some additional dead code. Good stuff!
17:04 < jnewbery> ok, to start off, can you all briefly explain what this PR is attempting to do. Are you concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK?
17:06 < jnewbery> Does it change external behaviour/functionality?
17:07 < dergoegge> no NODE_WITNESS is always set already
17:07 < lightlike> cleaning up some special functionality which was needed for the segwit transition period, which is no longer needed after segwit has locked in/is only used in tests.
17:07 < jnewbery> ok, so this PR is a refactor. It shouldn't change any externally observable behaviour (except in regtest mode in the the functional tests)
17:08 < jnewbery> dergoegge lightlike: exactly right
17:08 < emzy> disabeling segwit with -segwitheight=-1 is not posible anymore. But it has no practical use outsite of tests.
17:09 < jnewbery> any questions about the motivation/high level summary of this PR?
17:09 < jnewbery> emzy: yes, exactly right
17:09 < jnewbery> Next question: This PR removed two subtests in p2p_segwit.py. What are those two subtests? What were they testing? Why can they now be removed?
17:12 < glozow> test_getblocktemplate_before_lockin and test_upgrade_after_activation
17:12 < jnewbery> glozow: right, and what did those tests do?
17:12 < jnewbery> and why is it ok to remove them?
17:12 < lightlike> looks like test_upgrade_after_activation is moved to some degree, not just deleted
17:14 < jnewbery> lightlike: right. We're still testing that functionality, but it's moved to its own test, since it doesn't have any interaction with the rest of p2p_segwit.py (and it's not testing p2p functionality)
17:14 < glozow> fum 
17:14 < glozow> oops sorree
17:15 < glozow> functionality* being upgrading a presegwit node after activation
17:15 < glozow> and redownloading the blocks it wasn't able to fully balidate before
17:16 < jnewbery> the test_getblocktemplate_before_lockin was testing the mining functionality before segwit lock-in. Segwit has locked in (and activated) for many years so we don't need to test that any more
17:16 < jnewbery> glozow: yes, that's right. That functionality was modified in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21009
17:16 < lightlike> why were segwit-aware nodes checking the witness commitment before lock in?
17:17 < glozow> lightlike: oo they were?
17:17 < lightlike> glozow: looking at the removed code of test_getblocktemplate_before_lockin, it seems that way
17:17 < jnewbery> glozow: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21090/files#diff-63f1c1e404966953bce51497a03d99e26f333237e26b9c69b20fb43b05520533L569-L578
17:18 < jnewbery> This is checking the witness commitment in the getblocktemplate output
17:19 < jnewbery> lightlike: I'm not sure why they were doing that. I'd need to dig into the history a bit
17:20 < jnewbery> here we go: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/9189
17:20 < jnewbery> "As a consistency check, it is useful to see whether GBT clients are ready for segwit deployment before segwit is actually used on the network (and even before it activates)."
17:21 < lightlike> interesting, thanks!
17:21 < jnewbery> In any case, segwit is now active on mainnet, so this functionality doesn't need to be tested any more
17:21 < jnewbery> Next question: What does the CNode.GetLocalServices() method do?
17:22 < dergoegge> Returns the service bits offered to the node (NODE_NETWORK, NODE_BLOOM, etc).
17:22 < dergoegge> how would i get the service bits that the node offers to us?
17:23 < glozow> who is "us?"
17:23 < jnewbery> dergoegge: it's important to distinguish between what service bits were advertised by us to the peer, and what service bits were advertised by the peer to us
17:23 < jnewbery> us = this node
17:24 < glozow> oh oh
17:24 < jnewbery> nLocalServices is the service bits the we have offered to the peer
17:25 < dergoegge> yes
17:25 < jnewbery> nServices is the service bits that the peer has offered to us
17:25 < dergoegge> ah thanks
17:25 < jnewbery> the service bits are included in the p2p `version` message that's sent by both parties at the start of the connection
17:26 < ben85> I think it happens in VERSION message processing
17:26 < ben85> nServices = ServiceFlags(nServiceInt);
17:26 < ben85>         if (!pfrom.IsInboundConn())
17:26 < ben85>         {
17:26 < ben85>             m_addrman.SetServices(pfrom.addr, nServices);
17:26 < ben85>         }
17:27 < dergoegge> do we offer different services to different nodes? or why does each CNode instance have its own nLocalServices?
17:27 < jnewbery> ben85: yes - that's where we receive the service bits that the peer is sending to us. You'll see further down in that function, we store those in pfrom.nServices: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3fc20abab03d71a982d6fe9c47155834b256ab17/src/net_processing.cpp#L2525
17:27 < jnewbery> dergoegge: very good question! What do you think?
17:28 < dergoegge> i dont know but i think nLocalServices is the same for every peer
17:28 < jnewbery> dergoegge: if that were the case, then we wouldn't need an nLocalServices member variable in each CNode object
17:28 < dergoegge> true
17:29 < dergoegge> in what case do we serve peers differently?
17:29 < svav> if they are using segwit or not?
17:29 < jnewbery> there are some base service bits that we set for all peers. They're defined globally here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3fc20abab03d71a982d6fe9c47155834b256ab17/src/init.cpp#L718
17:29 < jnewbery> (and after this PR, NODE_WITNESS is added to that)
17:30 < jnewbery> svav: no, we'll always advertise NODE_WITNESS to all peers (except, before this PR, if we've disabled segwit for use in a functional test)
17:30 < jnewbery> dergoegge: there are additional service bits that we may offer to peers. Can you think of what some of those are?
17:31 < dergoegge> NODE_BLOOM? 
17:31 < jnewbery> dergoegge: exactly right
17:32 < ben85> NODE_COMPACT_FILTERS ?
17:32 < lightlike> hmm, if we are in pruned mode, we first set NODE_NETWORK and then unset it later in init.cpp. that seems a bit strange.
17:32 < dergoegge> they are all listed here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3fc20abab03d71a982d6fe9c47155834b256ab17/src/protocol.h#L271
17:32 < jnewbery> dergoegge: you can see here https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/3fc20abab03d71a982d6fe9c47155834b256ab17/src/net.cpp#L1184-L1187 where we'll add NODE_BLOOM if we've set certain permissions for the peer
17:32 < jnewbery> ben85: I think NODE_COMPACT_FILTERS is enabled/disabled globally for all peers
17:33 < jnewbery> lightlike: ah yes, you're right. That does seem a bit messy.
17:33 < dergoegge> so we limit who we advertise the NODE_BLOOM service bit to? this might be a bit off-topic 
17:34 < jnewbery> dergoegge: yes, we can advertise NODE_BLOOM only to peers that we've configured to support sending bloom filters to
17:35 < ben85> Very interesting these NetPermissionFlags. Are they attributed to an other peer manually?
17:36 < jnewbery> it's a shame that this logic is spread out between init, net and net_processing. I'd like to consolidate that logic in net_processing as part of https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/19398
17:36 < jnewbery> next question: Why is this PR able to remove several calls to GetLocalServices()?
17:37 < dergoegge> if (GetLocalServices() & NODE_WITNESS) checks are no longer needed since NODE_WITNESS is always set.
17:37 < ben85> Because this validation (pfrom->GetLocalServices() & NODE_WITNESS) is no longer necessary 
17:39 < jnewbery> dergoegge ben85: right. Those conditionals in net_processing only remained because of the possibility that segwit was disabled in the tests. Now that we no longer need that functionality in the tests, we can remove the conditionals.
17:41 < jnewbery> q5: What does the GetBlockScriptFlags() function do?
17:43 < lightlike> it determines how to verify scripts; segwit/taproot/other softwork rules for scripts must only should be enforced after their activation height.
17:43 < ben85> According to the comment, it returns the script flags which should be checked for a given block
17:44 < jnewbery> lightlike ben85: yes, exactly right
17:44 < jnewbery> next question is a little harder
17:44 < jnewbery> q6: Why is it ok to always set SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS when SCRIPT_VERIFY_P2SH is set?
17:44 < ben85> GetBlockScriptFlags() is called only in CChainState::ConnectBlock() and MemPoolAccept::ConsensusScriptChecks(). Interesting.
17:46 < jnewbery> ben85: right, that's where we're validating a block, or validating a transaction to put into the mempool (which must be valid for the next block)
17:47 < jnewbery> any thoughts about the SCRIPT_VERIFY_WITNESS/SCRIPT_VERIFY_P2SH question?
17:47 < ben85> Because Segwit was activated after the BIP 16
17:47 < ben85> After the P2SH ?
17:48 < jnewbery> the logic was added in this PR, which includes a good summary: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11739
17:50 < dergoegge> why do we backdate these flags? just to save some logic?
17:50 < jnewbery> The idea was to simplify the logic around when to enforce the rules
17:50 < dergoegge> will we be able to do the same for taproot?
17:51 < jnewbery> The link to the chat is dead because botbotme no longer hosts chat logs. You can get it here instead: https://www.erisian.com.au/bitcoin-core-dev/log-2017-10-12.html#l-264
17:51 < dergoegge> https://gnusha.org/bitcoin-core-dev/2017-10-12.log
17:52 < jnewbery> dergoegge: good question. I'm not sure
17:52 < dergoegge> ah oops should have read your message to the end :D
17:52 < dergoegge> i guess we could ask that question for all the soft forks?
17:52 < jnewbery> I guess it depends on whether there have been any witness version 1 outputs that have been spent and would be invalid after the taproot softfork
17:52 < sipa> i would assume that (if there are no pre-activation taproot violations when it activates), when taproot gets buried, it can be unconditionally turned on?
17:53 < jnewbery> (or any witness version 1 outputs that are invalid under taproot rules and get spent between now and activation)
17:54 < jnewbery> I'd recommend looking at PR 11739 and reading the chat history around it. I think it's very interesting history.
17:54 < jnewbery> ok, final question. What does GenerateCoinbaseCommitment() do? Why is ok to remove the consensusParams.SegwitHeight check in that function?
17:55 < sipa> VERIFY_WITNESS depends on VERIFY_P2SH being set; the reason is that if WITNESS was allowed without P2SH, adding P2SH would not be a softfork (due to the order of validation operations in the current code)
17:55 < sipa> it's not just that it was added later, it actively depends on it
17:55 < jnewbery> sipa: 👍
17:56 < sipa> this is really just a nice property for testing, so that the invariant applies that adding more verification flags can never make validation go from invalid to valid
17:56 < sipa> for production this doesn't matter of course, as we know P2SH was long buried when WITNESS came into play
17:58 < jnewbery> GenerateCoinbaseCommitment calculates the block commitment defined in BIP 141 here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#commitment-structure
17:58 < lightlike> GenerateCoinbaseCommitment() is called in mining.cpp and adds the commitment to the merkle root of the witness data to the coinbase tx
17:58 < lightlike> since consensusParams.SegwitHeight can no longer be std::numeric_limits<int>::max , the check can be removed
17:59 < jnewbery> lightlike: exactly right!
17:59 < jnewbery> any final questions before we wrap up?
18:00 < jnewbery> Reminder that we're always looking for volunteer hosts. Let me know if you'd like to host a future review club meeting!
18:00 < jnewbery> thanks all
18:00 < jnewbery> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
