---
layout: pr
date: 2021-04-28
title: "Use effective values throughout coin selection"
pr: 17331
authors: [achow101]
components: ["wallet"]
host: Xekyo
status: past
commit: 4ac1add
---

## Notes

- Wallets maintain their balance as a pool of Unspent Transaction Outputs
  (UTXOs). An
  [OutputGroup](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/coinselection.h#L72)
  collects all UTXOs that were sent to the same public key.

- _Coin selection_ refers to the process of picking UTXOs from the wallet's UTXO
  pool to fund a transaction.

- Beyond the primary goal of funding a transaction, the secondary goals of coin
  selection are:

    - Minimizing short term and long term fees:
      We have to balance two needs: we want to pay the smallest fee now to get a
      timely confirmation, but we have to keep in mind that all of the wallet's
      UTXOs will need to be spent at some point. We shouldn't over-optimize
      locally at the detriment of large future costs. E.g. always using
      largest-first selection minimizes the current cost, but grinds the
      wallet's UTXO pool to dust.

    - Maintaining financial privacy:
      There are a number of heuristics that tracking companies employ to cluster
      payments and addresses. For example, using inputs with the same output
      script in two transactions indicates that the two transactions involved
      the same party. Similarly, it is usually assumed that all inputs of a
      transaction were controlled by the same entity. Sometimes the privacy and
      economic considerations are opposed. If you want to understand privacy
      considerations better, check out the [Privacy
      article](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Privacy) on the Bitcoin wiki.

    - Reliably move the payment(s) to finalization:
      Using unconfirmed inputs can make transactions unreliable. Unconfirmed
      transactions received from another wallet may time out or be replaced,
      making those funds disappear. Even using self-sent unconfirmed funds may
      delay the new transaction if the parent transaction has an extensive
      ancestry, is extraordinarily large, or used a lower feerate than targeted
      for the child transaction.

- The process of creating a transaction in Bitcoin Core's wallet roughly
  follows these steps:

    1. `CreateTransaction()` builds the header and recipient outputs, i.e. the
       parts of the transaction that will remain fixed throughout the coin
       selection process.

    2. The `long_term_feerate`, `effective_feerate`, and `discard_feerate` are
       established using `GetMinimumFeeRate()`, which falls back either to fee
       estimation or user input. The feerates remain constant for the remaining
       process. The amount to be raised from the inputs, `nTargetValue` is
       calculated from the sum of recipient amounts, the target feerate, and the
       size of the fixed transaction parts.

    3. The wallet's UTXO pool is retrieved via `AvailableCoins()`.

    4. Using the above fixed values, `SelectCoins()` is used to pick an input
       set to fund the transaction. If the user manually selected some UTXOs by
       means of the `CoinControl` feature, these UTXOs are used first. The
       remaining UTXOs are grouped into `OutputGroup`s. The grouped UTXOs are
       then used in one or multiple rounds of `SelectCoinsMinConf()`, using
       increasingly permissive `CoinEligibilityFilter`s to preselect
       `OutputGroup`s until an input set is found.

    5. Determine whether to create a change output, finish assembling the
       transaction, and sign the transaction.

- When a UTXO is selected as an input, the size of the transaction is increased,
  which in turn increases the necessary fees to maintain the targeted feerate.
  We can preempt the cost added by the input by considering each UTXO at its
  _effective value_, its value reduced by the UTXO's input cost at the given
  feerate.

- Bitcoin Core currently uses two different solvers:

    - The _knapsack solver_ sorts the available UTXOs by effective value, and
      then combines candidate input sets by randomly selecting or skipping
      inputs until it has sufficient funds for the transaction. When it finds a
      viable solution, it keeps the solution if it produces a smaller change
      than the prior stored solution. Then, the algorithm deselects the last
      input and continues traversing the UTXO list as described, trying to
      converge on the smallest change output above `MIN_CHANGE`. This random
      process is repeated up to 1,000 times.

    - The _Branch and Bound solver (BnB)_ deterministically searches the
      complete combination space to find an input set that will avoid the
      creation of a change output. It performs a depth-first search on a binary
      tree where each branch represents the inclusion or exclusion of a UTXO,
      exploring inclusion branches first, and backtracking whenever a subtree
      cannot yield a solution.  It returns the first discovered input set that
      is an _exact match_ for the funding requirement of the transaction. The
      qualifier _"exact match"_ here refers here to an input set that overshoots
      the `nTargetValue` by less than the cost of a change output.  The BnB
      algorithm is not guaranteed to find a solution even when there are
      sufficient funds since an _exact match_ may not exist.

- Using _effective values_ in coin selection means that we can freely add and
  remove inputs until we have have raised enough funds to pay for the
  transaction's fixed costs: the payment amounts, the transaction header and the
  output data. Whatever final input set we settle for, the increased transaction
  size and input costs have already been accounted for.

- [PR #17331](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17331) implements the use
  of _effective values_ across all different coin selection strategies. Prior,
  it was only used for the BnB selection where it facilitated the search to be
  effectively performed. Introducing _effective values_ into the knapsack solver
  means it no longer works on a moving target, and thus only needs to be run
  once. It also allows some of the pre-selection steps to be shared between BnB
  and knapsack.

- This PR also changes the behavior of `SelectCoinsMinConf()` to try BnB first
  and then attempt knapsack only in the case that BnB did not find an input set.
  Before this PR, the function would only run one or the other strategy
  controlled by the boolean flag `use_bnb`.

## Questions

1. How does the _effective value_
   [differ](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2473)
   from the `nValue` of a UTXO?

2. What is
   [`not_input_fees`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2402)?
   What does this help with?

3. What happens when
   [`m_subtract_fee_outputs`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2473)
   is true?

4. What does
   [`cost_of_change`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2416)
   represent? How do we know the `cost_of_change` in advance?

5. What are [`long_term_feerate`,
   `effective_feerate`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.h#L611),
   and
   [`discard_feerate`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.h#L69)?

6. Why are the `OutputGroup`s calculated separately for
   [BnB](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2415)
   and
   [knapsack](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2420)?

7. What purpose did the
   [while-loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/23c85ae91ea0a720b591cab8dfd20be72425ab31#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8L2856)
   in `CreateTransaction()` serve? Why is it safe to remove it?

8. Under which circumstances do resulting transactions not create a change
   output? (Hint: there are [two
   cases](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2919).)

## Meeting Log
{% irc %}
18:59 <murch> #startmeeting
18:59 <jnewbery_> hi !
18:59 ⚡ uncommon revs git engine
18:59 <jonatack> hi :)
18:59 <glozow> HI
18:59 <murch> Hi everyone :)
18:59 <uncommon> hi
18:59 ℹ  Guest41403 is now known as hernanmarino
18:59 <schmidty> hi!
18:59 <hernanmarino> hi !
19:00 <lightlike> hey
19:00 <biteskola> hello
19:00 <svav> Hi
19:00 <b10c> hi
19:00 <marqusat> hi
19:00 <raj__> hi
19:00 <larryruane_> hi
19:00 <darius82> hi!
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:00 <murch> If we have anyone new today, please feel free to say "Hi" :)
19:01 <sipa> hi
19:01 <murch> hi sipa, welcome to PR Review Club ;)
19:01 ℹ  jnewbery_ is now known as jnewbery
19:01 <hernanmarino> :D
19:01 <b10c> hi sipa! welcome!
19:01 <murch> So, we'll be talking about #17331 today
19:01 <sipa> I said "hi", not "Hi".
19:02 <uncommon> ;P
19:02 <sipa> (go on)
19:02 <murch> Did everyone have a chance to check out the notes and review the PR? How about a quick y/n from everyone
19:02 <glozow> y
19:02 <raj__> y
19:02 <dkf> y
19:02 <marqusat> y
19:02 <ccdle12> n
19:02 <svav> y
19:03 <sipa> i skimmed the notes
19:03 <larryruane_> y (mostly)
19:03 <lightlike> y
19:03 <jonatack> re-reviewing
19:03 <hernanmarino> y
19:03 <fodediop> hi
19:03 <darius82> y for notes but not the PR
19:03 <michaelfolkson> The notes were excellent imho
19:03 <hernanmarino> great notes, i agree
19:03 <murch> So, Coin Selection... What are we trying to achieve here in a sentence?
19:04 <murch> Thanks
19:04 <michaelfolkson> Selecting UTXOs to use to transfer Bitcoin ideally cheaply and not leaking unnecessary privacy
19:05 <pinheadmz> the cheapest possible transaction to get our job done + some privacy if we can
19:05 <fodediop> Optimize for fees paid while minimizing potential dust
19:05 <sipa> minizing fee costs for transactions created, now (but also in the future); some privacy considerations
19:05 <larryruane_> maybe also help the community by reducing the UTXO set? (less storage for everyone)
19:05 <jnewbery> notes and questions are here, by the way: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17331
19:05 <murch> Right, so we need to fund the transaction, want to be thrifty, but also remain private. Not the easiest thing to do.
19:05 <hernanmarino>  the use of effective values across different coin selection strategies
19:06 <murch> Thanks John
19:06 <murch> Good pointer, Hernan. So, how does the effective value differ from the `nValue` of a UTXO?
19:06 <marqusat> It will have effective spending fee subtracted from nValue when coin_selection_params.m_subtract_fee_outputs is true.
19:07 <glozow> effective value deducts the cost of including a UTXO from the `nValue` so that you're not using a moving target while selecting coins
19:07 <uncommon> effective value = subsequently spendable value
19:07 <darius82> It's the estimated value of the utxo after it has been redeemed by the next utxo
19:07 <darius82> effectiveValue = utxo.value − feePerByte × bytesPerInput
19:07 <glozow> if you just used `nValue`, after you pick a coin, the fees increase since the input increases the tx size
19:07 <murch> Right, so is effective value something that is always the same, @glozow?
19:08 <glozow> well, it depends on the feerate
19:08 <uncommon> murch in what domain? or are you saying in all domains?
19:08 <larryruane_> uncommon: excellent way to say it
19:08 <uncommon> s/saying/asking
19:08 <murch> Exactly, so the effective value is dependend on the context in which we are building the transaction, especially the targeted feerate.
19:09 <murch> so, what does using the `effective_value` vs the actual value of a UTXO help us do?
19:10 <glozow> only run knapsack once
19:10 <uncommon> determine of price efficient creating certain outputGroups are?
19:10 <uncommon> s/of/how
19:10 <darius82> it helps us create a transaction with a specific fee rate more easily
19:10 <murch> glozow: Yep, but why?
19:10 <murch> darius82: yeah
19:10 <raj__> question: are we using effective value when params.m_subtract_fee_outputs is false?
19:11 <murch> raj__: Great question, let's push that one back a little bit :)
19:11 <raj__> sure.. :)
19:11 <dkf> making sure we are creating a tx that is priced in such a way that it will be committed/propagated?
19:11 <glozow> murch: because, before, after you ran knapsack with nValues instead of effective values, you could be off by a little bit since you didn't take the inputs into account
19:12 <glozow> so you'd try again
19:12 <murch> dkf: Right, what we are all getting at here is that by calculating the effective value of UTXOs, we already account for the cost of the inputs when selectign them.
19:12 <sipa> it's making coin selection not a circular reasoning: because adding an extra input changes how much fee you have to pay, possbily necessitating trying coin selection again
19:12 <raj__> can we say, we need to run knapsack only once because subset sum isn't a moving target anymore?
19:13 <murch> sipa, raj__: yes, well put
19:13 <glozow> raj__: yeahhh
19:13 <murch> So, in this context, you may have seen `not_input_fees`: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2402
19:13 <murch> What is included in that variable and why do we keep track of that?
19:13 <jonatack> src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2402
19:14 <marqusat> Effective fee of static vsize overhead + outputs vsize. It’s needed to calculate selection_target, doesn’t need to be passed separately alongside nValue to SelectCoinsBnB.
19:14 <glozow> marqusat: all outputs? :)
19:14 <murch> marqusat: Yes, but which outputs specifically?
19:14 <murch> glozow: hey, that was my line.
19:14 <murch> haha
19:15 <lightlike> but isn't the knapsack algorithm non-deterministic with some randomness involved? In that case, couldn't running it multiple times still get a better solution, regardless of effective values used or not?
19:15 <murch> lightlike: It still does run 1,000 times
19:15 <lightlike> oh ok
19:15 <murch> It just doesn't run n*1,000 times
19:15 <murch> but we'll get into that a bit later as well ;)
19:16 <dkf> the fee for all extra block data that is not user-provided payload? I am not sure if this amount changes though due to unfamiliarity with this part
19:17 <murch> mh, I'm not sure what you mean with "not user-provided"
19:17 <uncommon>  dkf elaborate on "extra block data that is not user-provided payload"
19:18 <glozow> marqusat: murch: payment outputs only. excluding change outputs that may or may not be created.
19:18 <murch> Right
19:18 <dkf> it seems to me this looks for costs for things which are outside of a regular payload, that's my spontaneous impression.
19:18 <murch> so, we collect the fixed costs of the transaction which will not change due to the results of the coin seletcion
19:18 <lightlike> so all parts of the tx that are not influenced by coinselection?
19:19 <murch> ^ that!
19:19 <glozow> lightlike: yeah, that's how i think of it
19:19 <dkf> non-user provided payload = protocol native payload
19:19 <murch> Included are the costs to create the recipient outputs and the transaction header which we both need in any case
19:19 <glozow> `fixed_fees` maybe
19:19 <murch> not included are the inputs and the change output, because the latter is optional
19:20 <murch> Alright, you may have noticed `m_subtract_fee_outputs`. When it is set to true, some of our calculations change. What is happening there?
19:20 <raj__> murch, when you say "the recipient output" does that assuming a single output spend of some standard form?
19:21 ℹ  promag_ is now known as promag
19:21 <marqusat> murch: Effective value is being considered.
19:21 <murch> raj__: It could also be five payments in a single transaction, an OP_RETURN, or custom script. Basically all the things that are the intended product of the transaction
19:22 <murch> marqusat: How is effective value considered differently when the flag is true?
19:22 <raj__> when `m-subtract_fee_outputs` is false we use effective value, and nValue when its true. Thats what it seems to me from the code.
19:23 <murch> yes, that's important, why do we no longer deduct the fees? Where do they go instead?
19:23 <glozow> fees are deducted from the recipient output instead
19:23 <darius82> they get subtracted from nValue of the output(s)?
19:23 <murch> yep!
19:24 <darius82> the recipients outputs as opposed to the change output
19:24 <sipa> raj__: at the time coin selection is invoked we already have what you could call an "incomplete" transaction; it can have multiple inputs and outputs already (which must be included); the goal of coin selection is adding (a) additional inputs from the wallet and (b) optionally adding change so that the fee is as intended
19:25 <raj__> sipa, thanks, now its clear..
19:25 <lightlike> doesn't that mean that we should run knapsack multiple times again because we have a moving target again? (could have to substract less from the outputs if we had a better solution)
19:25 <murch> The way this was implemented (now amended) in our snapshot we're looking, what subtle issue gets introduced here when we evaluate the effective value as being the whole value?
19:25 <glozow> oh hey, `no_input_fees` doesn't include coin control inputs right?
19:25 <murch> lightlike: I like how you're thinking here :)
19:26 <murch> glozow: Great question, I hadn't actually thought about it. But I think that is resolved by the coin control inputs getting used first in either selection procedure and their fees getting accounted for then.
19:27 <sipa> right; they are still inputs that can be selected; as long as they're treated like other ones in terms of accounting, they shouldn't be counted again throigh no_input_fees
19:27 <murch> But essentially what lightlike and glozow both are getting here at is that we no longer filter UTXOs that are uneconomic and that the fees move back to the end of the transaction building
19:28 <murch> if e.g. the total effective value of all UTXOs were negative, we could build a transaction that cannot pay for itself
19:29 <murch> Let's establish some more terminology here.
19:30 <murch> What does `cost_of_change` represent?
19:30 <murch> https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/453c00c8eaffb7ee16b3b3232a6c3e39b1b52882#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8R2416
19:30 <marqusat> The cost of adding change output and of spending it in the future (assuming discard feerate for the future spend).
19:30 <murch> how do we know the `cost_of_change` in advance?
19:30 <murch> marqusat: Yes, good!
19:30 <glozow> we know the change output type in advance - it's configured across the wallet
19:31 <glozow> (and thus we know the size of the input to spend it too)
19:31 <murch> exactly
19:32 <murch> Even when some wallets e.g. copy the output type of the recipient output(s), when we are starting the coni selection, we know what we are going for as an output type—if we need one in the first place
19:32 <darius82> is the predicted fee for spending it in the future based on the current fee rate?
19:32 <glozow> i guess we don't really _know_ it in advance, there's a bit of guessing for the spending feerate
19:32 <glozow> darius82: uses an estimated long term feerate
19:33 <murch> darius82: Great question. It's really hard to guess what feerate it will be spent at in the future.
19:33 <murch> That actually brings us to the next point:
19:33 <b10c> marqusat: what do you mean with "(assuming discard feerate for the future spend)"?
19:33 <murch> We see a number of different feerates across this PR
19:33 <murch> Some of them are already getting mentioned
19:33 <darius82> glozow thanks!
19:34 <murch> But what are `long_term_feerate`, `effective_feerate` and `discard_feerate`?
19:34 <murch> (see: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.h#L611 or https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.h#L69)
19:34 <lightlike> effective rate is what we want to pay for the tx right now.
19:35 <murch> b10c: Actually, that's a fair question
19:35 <murch> lightlike: Yep!
19:35 <murch> b10c, but it fits well to the current topic :)
19:35 <glozow> conceptually,
19:35 <glozow> effective feerate = base feerate we're aiming for in this transaction
19:35 <glozow> long term feerate = upper bound for spending an output in the future
19:35 <glozow> discard feerate = lower bound for spending an output in the future, any less and we'll call it dust
19:37 <murch> I like to be a bit more precise for the long_term_feerate:
19:37 <lightlike> "upper bound" probably not in a mathematical sense right? I mean how could we predict that feerates could go crazy
19:37 <murch> an estimate of the maximum feerate that we will need to pay in the long term to use a UTXO. A reasonable upper bound on what we might need to pay for a low time preference transaction in the long term.
19:38 <murch> Like, what can we get away with to free the value of that UTXO some time in the future
19:38 <raj__> curious to know how we are calculating this.
19:38 <murch> e.g. with a consolidation transaction or if we're willing to wait for a week
19:38 <murch> raj__: We take the minimum of the 1000 block target and the arbitrary guess of 10 sat/vB. ;)
19:38 <glozow> i guess i mean upper bound as in, an estimate so we're conservative about what feerate we expect to be able to get in the future?
19:39 ⚡ murch hopes you weren't looking for something with more academic rigor here :sweatysmile:
19:39 <dkf> is the assumption that the long term fee rate always increases compared to the effective rate? is there no way it could be cheaper than expected?
19:39 <raj__> murch, fancy.. :D
19:40 <darius82> murch why is long_term_feerate a maximum feerate, it sounds like a minimum feerate for 'what we can get away with'?
19:40 <murch> dkf: No, it's basically, just accounting for the fact that we will have to spend money in the future to spend a UTXO
19:40 <glozow> dkf: i thought opposite. we think we'll be able to spend at a lower feerate in the future?
19:40 <glozow> l o w t i m e p r e f e r e n c e
19:40 <b10c> darius82: agree
19:41 <murch> It's a bit subtle, it has both elements of a minimum or a maximum
19:42 <lightlike> do we calculate this only to determine whether we should create a change output or not bother and add it to the fees? or are there additional reasons?
19:42 <murch> Like, "we know this will cost money", how much will we reasonably need to pay to use it in an input
19:42 <murch> lightlike: It's only used to estimate the cost_of_chagne
19:43 <lightlike> ok, but then my questions applies the same to the cost_of_change - to we calculate that for these reasons?
19:44 <sipa> right, they"re not really upper bounds or lower bounds; they're both jusg estimates - but one is conservatively high, the other is conservatively low
19:44 <sipa> *just
19:44 <raj__> murch, it seems here cost_of_change is only dependent on `effective_rate` and `discard_rate`? https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2413
19:44 <murch> lightlike: Let's pick that back up in a couple questions :)
19:44 <lightlike> sure!
19:45 <raj__> So it not `long_time_rate` ? or these three are interrelated somehow?
19:46 <murch> raj__: mh, you appear to be right
19:46 <murch> Aha, I believe the `discard_feerate = min(10, long_term_feerate)`
19:47 <raj__> Ok.. that makes sense then..
19:47 <b10c> murch: aahh
19:48 <murch> Sorry, I guess we should have cleared that up earlier :)
19:48 <darius82> @murch i guess that works because `long_term_feerate` will never be lower than the dust fee rate?
19:49 <murch> mh. I think that might be a bit subtle to sort out
19:49 <murch> Let's move on with the questions and get into that later?
19:49 <darius82> :thumbs up:
19:49 <murch> Why are OutputGroups calculated separately for BnB and Knapsack?
19:50 <murch> https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2415
19:50 <marqusat> To keep existing legacy behavior of knapsack spending dust outputs, so we don’t want to filter positive only for it.
19:50 <murch> marqusat: Right!
19:50 <murch> Actually, true story, I kinda broke that in 2014 with a tiny patch to coin selection that later got reverted when people found that it caused the UTXO set to bloat :p
19:51 <murch> I made the Knapsack prefilter to only use economic inputs
19:51 <murch> So, this PR leaves that behavior intact, to help keep wallet's UTXO pools slim
19:52 <jnewbery> murch: that seems like it might be suboptimal for users
19:52 <murch> so, what purpose did the while loop in CreateTransaction() serve? Why is it safe to remove?
19:52 <murch> https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/23c85ae91ea0a720b591cab8dfd20be72425ab31#diff-1f2db0e4d5c12d109c7f0962333c245b49b696cb39ff432da048e9d6c08944d8L2856
19:53 <lightlike> I don't see why there is a need to keep legacy behavior here. I mean, it's either better or worse to keep it, but why should we care how it used to be?
19:53 <murch> jnewbery: I agree. We shouldn't be creatign dust in the first place, and BnB should also help use it constructively when it finds solutions.
19:53 <jnewbery> do you expect a later PR to remove that legacy behaviour?
19:54 <Murch> oops?!
19:54 <sipa> you got Capitalized.
19:54 <Murch> better than decapitated
19:54 <Murch> um did you get my question?
19:54 <Murch> about the while loop?
19:54 <lightlike> yes
19:55 <Murch> good
19:55 <darius82> with the previous algorithm there was the moving target, but since we use the effective value we dont have that problem anymore?
19:56 <Murch> jnewbery: Yes, I expect that Knapsack will go away altogether, but review in Wallet has been pretty slow, so there are efforts that have been waiting for literally years in that regard
19:56 <glozow> it's the loop for knapsack solver finding a solution but not taking into account input costs, then needing to run again
19:56 <Murch> darius82: Exactly!
19:56 <Murch> glozow: right!
19:56 <Murch> okay, last question:
19:56 <Murch> So, when do we end up not creating any change output?
19:57 <Murch> Hint: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2919
19:57 <glozow> (1) When the change output would be dust, drop it to fees
19:57 <glozow> (2) When we are in the range of an “exact match,” i.e. the difference between the selected coins’ total effective value and the target value is lower than the cost of a change output
19:58 <Murch> right
19:58 <Murch> so, I think we actually didn't even talk about `exact_match`
19:58 <Murch> and it ties into some questions from above ^
19:58 <Murch> It means we're close enough to throw away the excess of what we have selected
19:59 <Murch> because creating a change and spending that change later would cost more than dropping the remainder to the fees
19:59 <Murch> that's what we use the `discard_feerate` for in estimating the future input cost of the change output
19:59 <Murch> hui, that was a lot of content
20:00 <Murch> We good? any questions?
20:00 <jnewbery> We Good :)
20:00 <larryruane_> question, if there's time, are there functional or unit tests that run through these various code paths? i like to watch code in action using a debugger
20:01 <lightlike> so that's  also to keep the utxo set small? As opposed to creating the change output and just not spending it / hoping for extremely low feerate times?
20:01 <Murch> There are! Look for BnB in the tests :)
{% endirc %}
