---
layout: pr
date: 2021-06-23
title: "Two small fixes to node broadcast logic"
pr: 22261
authors: [jnewbery]
components: ["mempool", "p2p"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: ba99f37a
---

## Notes

- The mempool keeps a set of [_unbroadcast_
  transactions](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0844084c/src/txmempool.h#L586)
  containing the txids of transactions that have not passed initial broadcast yet
  (determined based on a heuristic, whether or not the node has received a
  `getdata` for it). The unbroadcast set was introduced in PR #18038, which we
  covered in a [previous review club](/18038).

- There are two (related) mechanisms for rebroadcasting transactions:

  - The wallet re-submits its own transactions to the node in
    [`CWallet::ResendWalletTransactions()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0844084c/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L1745)
    (which calls into the node's `BroadcastTransaction()` function).

  - The node broadcasts the unbroadcast transactions to its peers in
    [`PeerManagerImpl::ReattemptInitialBroadcast()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0844084c/src/net_processing.cpp#L1099)
    (which calls `PeerManagerImpl::_RelayTransaction()`).

  Both of these mechanisms are executed on the scheduler thread.

- Transactions can be referred to by txid (without witness) or by wtxid (with
  witness, defined in
  [BIP141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#specification)).
  Multiple valid transactions can have the same non-witness data (same txid) but
  different witnesses (different wtxid).

- Transactions are announced to peers either by txid or by wtxid (since PR
  #18044, which we also covered in a [previous review club](/18044)). Whether a
  peer wishes to receive announcements using txid or wtxid is negotiated during
  connection. We refer to peers that prefer to receive wtxid announcements as
  wtxid-relay peers.

- There are two unexpected behaviors in
  [`BroadcastTransaction()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0844084c/src/node/transaction.cpp#L29):
  one is related to unbroadcast and the other is in wtxid-based transaction relay.

  - Unbroadcast: If `BroadcastTransaction()` is called with a transaction that
    has the same txid as a transaction in the mempool (can be same witness,
    different witness or even invalid witness), it causes the transaction to be
    re-added to the unbroadcast set.

  - Relay: If `BroadcastTransaction()` is called with a
    same-txid-different-wtxid transaction as something already in the mempool,
    it will call `RelayTransaction()` with the wtxid of the argument tx's wtxid
    rather than the one in the mempool. This causes the relay to fail (`INV`s are
    not sent) for wtxid-relay peers because `SendMessages()` queries the mempool by
    wtxid, doesn't find it, and drops the announcement.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
   What was your review approach?

2. How is `BroadcastTransaction()` invoked (i.e. what code paths)?

3. What happens when `PeerManager::RelayTransaction()` is called with the wtxid
   of a transaction that isn't in the mempool?

4. What does the unbroadcast set represent, conceptually? When should a
   transaction be added and removed from the unbroadcast set?

5. In what scenario would the mempool have a transaction with the same txid but
   different wtxid as a wallet transaction (feel free to give creative answers)?

6. What bugs are present prior to this PR? Can you think of a scenario in which
   they cause a privacy leak?

7. How does PR #22261 fix these bugs?

8. Bonus: Why does the unbroadcast set contain txids instead of wtxids?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <LarryRuane> hi
17:01 <schmidty> howdy
17:01 <svav> hi
17:01 <dopedsilicon> Hey
17:01 <michaelfolkson> hola
17:01 <Azorcode> Hi 
17:01 <glozow> hi everyone! welcome to PR Review Club :) we're looking at Two small fixes to node broadcast logic today: https://bitcoincore.reviews/22261
17:01 <lightlike> hi
17:01 <glozow> did anyone get a chance to look at the notes or review the PR?
17:02 <svav> Looked at the notes
17:02 <michaelfolkson> Yup, maybe can't answer all the questions though
17:03 <michaelfolkson> Took a while to get my head around why the fixes were needed
17:03 <glozow> okie dokie
17:03 <glozow> so this PR is making changes to the `BroadcastTransaction()` function - can anyone tell me what this function does?
17:03 <glozow> we're here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/7317e14a44c6efc545e6fb9bcedee7174e93a8fa/src/node/transaction.cpp#L29
17:04 <glozow> (guesses are fine too)
17:05 <michaelfolkson> So broadcasts a transaction :) Called by RPCs
17:06 <michaelfolkson> Too obvious?
17:06 <lightlike> adds transactions to the mempool and/or unbroadcast set and also relays them immediately
17:06 <LarryRuane> This is to send a transaction that originated in the current node (as opposed to being relayed, one that we recieved from a different node) ... (i'm not too confident in this answer)
17:06 <glozow> lightlike: wonderful, yes. invokes the mempool validation logic + relays
17:07 <glozow> LarryRuane: aha yes, it's interesting that it's in the src/node folder
17:07 <glozow> so these transactions would come from clients (e.g. RPC and wallet)
17:08 <glozow> where is `BroadcastTransaction()` called? is anyone able to link us to some call sites?
17:09 <svav> src/node/transaction.cpp
17:09 <LarryRuane> could we get a little more background on "RPC" versus "wallet"? If I had to guess, I'd say `sendrawtransaction` is RPC, and generally has NOTHING to do with the local wallet ... where as "wallet RPC" would be something like `sendmany`
17:09 <glozow> svav: that's where `BroadcastTransaction()` is defined yes
17:09 <sipa> LarryRuane: that sounds correct
17:10 <sipa> sendmany is instructing your local wallet to construct & broadcast a transaction
17:10 <svav> can be called by either sendrawtransaction RPC or wallet RPCs
17:10 <glozow> LarryRuane: correct - `sendrawtransaction` lets you submit a raw transaction directly to the node, you could call that without having the wallet ocmpiled
17:10 <sipa> sendrawtransaction is sending it yourself, no wallet involved
17:11 <glozow> right
17:11 <LarryRuane> thanks sipa and glozow, very helpful
17:11 <michaelfolkson> So is the BroadcastTransaction() function used for both transactions originated in user's wallet and transactions received from other peers?
17:11 <glozow> ok, does anyone know exactly what bugs are being fixed in #22261 or should we walk through it together?
17:12 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson I think not, not used for tx received from other peers
17:12 <glozow> michaelfolkson: it wouldn't come from other peers
17:12 <glozow> that invokes `AcceptToMemoryPool()` from the net processing layer
17:13 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane glozow: Ok thanks
17:13 <michaelfolkson> I think I understand what bugs are being fixed but I had to get my head round some terminology
17:13 <glozow> michaelfolkson: feel free to give a guess of what the bugs are?
17:14 <michaelfolkson> Ok so summarizing John's description...
17:15 <michaelfolkson> Rebroadcasting a transaction that peers aren't interested in
17:15 <michaelfolkson> (as it has already been broadcast to them)
17:15 <michaelfolkson> Need to define what the unbroadcast set is here
17:15 <glozow> mm okay, i think this probably touches on the unbroadcast set
17:15 <glozow> that's 1 part of the PR
17:16 <glozow> good idea, anybody want to define unbroadcast set?
17:16 <glozow> hint: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0844084c/src/txmempool.h#L586
17:16 <glozow> https://bitcoincore.reviews/18038
17:16 <michaelfolkson> I looked it up there, yeah
17:16 <michaelfolkson> "when the initial broadcast of a transaction hasn’t been deemed successful"
17:16 <michaelfolkson> And then you need to define what successful means :)
17:17 <michaelfolkson> receiving a single GETDATA
17:17 <LarryRuane> The way I understand unbroadcast set is, our node originates a tx, sends it out, but isn't sure that any other node has it (maybe the P2P message got dropped?)
17:17 <glozow> LarryRuane: right, the goal is to have an idea of whether our initial broadcast of transactions has succeeded.
17:18 <LarryRuane> other nodes *may* have it, but we're not sure
17:18 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Right the message could have got dropped, the node might already know of the transaction or the node might not be interested in that transaction despite not having it?
17:18 <michaelfolkson> Is that right glozow?
17:19 <glozow> michaelfolkson: right, so we're naming scenarios for why a peer might not send us a GETDATA for a transaction (which would cause the tx to remain in the unbroadcast set)
17:19 <glozow> and you're correct - it's possible there's some connection issue, they might already know the transaction, and "might not be interested" could be that they already rejected the tx or heard it from someone else
17:20 <LarryRuane> so IIUC what makes the unbroadcast set special is that we don't retry those tx sends as quickly as we used to, we wait about up to one day
17:20 <glozow> i don't think we reject tx invs for no reason 🤔
17:20 <michaelfolkson> So it could be "unsuccessful" from your perspective even though all nodes already know and have that transaction
17:20 <glozow> LarryRuane: right
17:20 <glozow> michaelfolkson: yes. that's unlikely if this is the first time broadcasting that transaction, though
17:20 <LarryRuane> for better privacy (sorry if i'm being obvious :)  )
17:21 <glozow> this is only intended for the initial broadcast
17:21 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Right if you are originating the transaction, gotcha
17:21 <glozow> LarryRuane: not at all, i'm sure this is new information for lots of people! or good to review
17:22 <lightlike> if that tx originates from your node, how could it happen that they know it already? (if they learnt about it from some other peer then *that peer or another* must have sent you a GETDATA at some time, so it would be cleared from the unbroadcast set already?)
17:23 <glozow> lightlike: right, it shouldn't be the case that your unbroadcast set has a transaction that has already gone through initial broadcast
17:23 <glozow> but one of the bugs here is you could re-add a transaction to your unbroadcast set
17:23 <LarryRuane> ok but if it's a *set* ... sets can't have duplicates, right?
17:24 <glozow> yes, but once you've removed it, the set won't remember that it's already seen it before
17:24 <LarryRuane> ah, ok
17:25 <glozow> so our issue is: after we've already broadcast the tx, we don't want to re-add it to our unbroadcast set, because that will cause us to keep rebroadcasting it (and we won't remove it because our peer won't re-request it from us)
17:25 <glozow> does that make sense?
17:25 <glozow> peers*
17:25 <lightlike> would we remove it though after it makes it into a block in that situation?
17:26 <michaelfolkson> What was the rationale for adding it to the unbroadcast set before this PR?
17:26 <michaelfolkson> Just an oversight?
17:26 <LarryRuane> is this caused by what may be considered a user error? Do I have this flow right?: User initiates a tx (on our local node) ... gets broadcast (and also added to unbroadcast set) ... GETDATA happens, so we remove from unbroadcast set .. then user re-submits the same tx?
17:26 <glozow> lightlike: i thiiiink so
17:27 <glozow> LarryRuane: correct, it would be because the user called it again
17:28 <LarryRuane> so all what we've discussed so far here, is independed of the txid / wtxid distinction? I'm unclear how that relates to all this
17:28 <michaelfolkson> Yeah that is coming now
17:28 <glozow> LarryRuane: that's relevant here too
17:29 <LarryRuane> is the map key for the unbroadcast set the txid or the wtxid? (guess i could just look it up!)
17:29 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Relevant to the first fix?
17:29 <svav> Are there any diagrams for all this?
17:29 <LarryRuane> yes i was asking about the first fix
17:30 <michaelfolkson> That's the second fix? There's no overlap right?
17:30 <glozow> well, they're intertwined
17:30 <michaelfolkson> Ohh
17:30 <glozow> so what happens if you call `BroadcastTransaction()` with a transaction that has same-txid-different-wtxid as a tx in the mempool?
17:30 <glozow> (on master, before this PR)
17:30 <glozow> svav: i'm not sure, i think the review club for 18038 would be best place for info
17:31 <glozow> (do we know what I mean when i say same-txid-different-wtxid?)
17:31 <svav> it will call RelayTransaction() with the wtxid of the argument tx’s wtxid rather than the one in the mempool. This causes the relay to fail (INVs are not sent) for wtxid-relay peers because SendMessages() queries the mempool by wtxid, doesn’t find it, and drops the announcement.
17:31 <LarryRuane> glozow yes I do get that distinction
17:31 <glozow> svav: yes! well said
17:32 <svav> I copied that lol
17:32 <glozow> i know
17:32 <glozow> :P
17:32 <glozow> so before this PR, if you called `BroadcastTransaction()` with a transaction that has same-txid-different-wtxid as a tx in the mempool, it would get re-added to the unbroadcast set without even going through validation
17:33 <glozow> not a huge issue, but not exactly the behavior we want
17:33 <glozow> so the first fix in the PR is to move adding to unbroadcast set after a successful submission to mempool
17:33 <svav> What is the fix then?
17:34 <glozow> the other problem is that we would call `RelayTransaction()` with the wtxid of this transaction, rather than the one in the mempool
17:35 <glozow> ("this" transaction = the argument to the function) 
17:35 <svav> For beginners can someone explain how two transaction can have the same txid but different wtxids?
17:35 <michaelfolkson> I do agree with svav that a diagram would be nice here :)
17:35 <svav> I love diagrams :)
17:35 <michaelfolkson> The interaction between the mempool, the unbroadcast set etc
17:35 <LarryRuane> I'm trying to understand why there would be two tx with the same txid but different witnesses (different wtxid) ... is it because there's some random element in the witness data? so if I submit the same tx twice (but signing each separately), then this can happen?
17:35 <LarryRuane> svav yes you beat me to that question!
17:36 <michaelfolkson> It was discussed yesterday in the L2 onchain workshop right? You find a cheaper witness
17:36 <glozow> mm so the txid of a transaction doesn't commit to the witness data
17:37 <glozow> i'm trying to find a good diagram
17:37 <LarryRuane> right so IIUC the txid commits to the *effects* of a tx only, the wtxid commits also to the authorization
17:37 <glozow> LarryRuane: correct
17:37 <michaelfolkson> https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/99409/what-does-segwit-remove
17:38 <michaelfolkson> At the bottom
17:38 <michaelfolkson> The wtxids get collected up to the coinbase transaction and are independent of the txids
17:38 <glozow> nono, that's the coinbase witness commitment
17:38 <glozow> we're talking about what transaction data gets serialized to get the wtxid vs the txid
17:39 <glozow> https://usercontent.irccloud-cdn.com/file/1XFdPlGD/image.png
17:39 <glozow> this is the simplest diagram i can find
17:40 <glozow> basically, you don't include witness data in txid haha
17:40 <michaelfolkson> Right the coinbase tx commits to the witnesses but not the transaction attached to that witness
17:40 <sipa> yes they do
17:40 <glozow> er, we're not talking about the coinbase commitment
17:41 <sipa> the coinbase tx commitments contains the merkle root of the wtxid tree
17:41 <glozow> and ^
17:41 <sipa> wtxids commit to the full transaction, witness and non-witness data
17:41 <michaelfolkson> But you can change the wtxid without changing the txid of that transaction
17:41 <sipa> yes, by changing the witness
17:42 <michaelfolkson> The witness data is not committed to in the txid. Otherwise that would reintroduce malleability
17:42 <sipa> yes
17:42 <LarryRuane> sipa so was I correct in my earlier question, you can create an unlimited number of valid witnesses for a given tx (assuming you can create one)?
17:42 <michaelfolkson> Ok thanks. I thought I understood that lol
17:43 <sipa> LarryRuane: yes
17:43 <sipa> LarryRuane: well, technically speaking there is only a finite number of valid witnesses, due to block weight being finite :)
17:43 <glozow> teehee
17:44 <glozow> hok
17:44 <michaelfolkson> Ok sorry glozow let's get back to your question
17:44 <glozow> so our peermanager's `RelayTransaction()` function takes a txid and wtxid parameter
17:44 <glozow> (can anyone tell me why?)
17:45 <glozow> what happens if we're trying to relay a transaction to our peer and can't find it in our mempool?
17:46 <michaelfolkson> We can't find the right wtxid or we literally can't find the txid?
17:46 <glozow> we can't find the transaction
17:46 <glozow> we know the id
17:47 <michaelfolkson> We can't relay it? We don't have it?
17:47 <glozow> yup
17:47 <michaelfolkson> You mean like it returns an error?
17:47 <glozow> no, we just skip it
17:47 <svav> wtxid parameter also used because some peers that prefer to receive wtxid announcements, i.e. wtxid-relay peers
17:48 <glozow> it's fully possible that we want to announce a transaction but it gets evicted from mempool by the time we go to announce it
17:48 <svav> ?
17:48 <glozow> but in this case, it could be because we called `RelayTransaction()` with a wtxid of a transaction that isn't in our mempool
17:48 <glozow> svav: exactly
17:48 <michaelfolkson> What's the scenario here. The wallet doesn't know what the node is doing? That causes the confusion?
17:49 <michaelfolkson> If they were perfectly in sync this wouldn't happen
17:50 <glozow> ok the scenario is this: we have a transaction. the mempool has one with witness A and we call `BroadcastTransaction()` with the exact same tx, but different witness
17:50 <lightlike> why would you malleate your own transactions?
17:50 <glozow> idk 🤷 maybe there are other parties in it
17:50 <glozow> it's a multisig, idk
17:51 <michaelfolkson> lightlike: It is finding a cheaper witness after previously broadcasting a more expensive witness I think
17:51 <glozow> maybe it has multiple spending paths and you/a counterparty both made transactions
17:51 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson cheaper meaning smaller (so lower fee)? 
17:51 <michaelfolkson> It isn't deliberate malleation. And obviously the txid isn't malleated post SegWit
17:52 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Smaller, so yeah lower fee
17:52 <glozow> this isn't a show-stopping bug, it's just not the behavior we'd expect
17:53 <glozow> either way, we should try to relay the transaction in our mempool
17:53 <michaelfolkson> "Prior to this commit, if BroadcastTransaction() is called with
17:53 <michaelfolkson> relay=true, then it'll call RelayTransaction() using the txid/wtxid of
17:53 <michaelfolkson> the new tx, not the txid/wtxid of the mempool tx."
17:53 <michaelfolkson> And the mempool doesn't have the new transaction?
17:53 <glozow> yes
17:54 <michaelfolkson> Ok
17:54 — michaelfolkson sweats
17:54 <LarryRuane> what's the worst effect (at a high level) of not fixing these bugs? transactions not being relayed around the network?
17:55 <glozow> good question. anybody have ideas?
17:55 <michaelfolkson> 2) just means less effective relaying right? More failures
17:55 <michaelfolkson> 1) is wasteful. Unnecessary relaying
17:55 <lightlike> for the first one, it would seem the opposite: tx beinged inv'ed too much (although the network already knows about it)
17:57 <glozow> right
17:58 <glozow> no consensus failures. but worth fixing, ya?
17:58 <lightlike> If i understand it correctly, "transactions not being relayed" would rather be a downside of the first fix: if we happen to have bad peers, broadcast to them, get a GETDATA but they don't relay any further, then we'd currently try again after ~24hours (when we have better peers), after the fix we wouldn't do this anymore.
17:58 <LarryRuane> we're about out of time, so this would be too long of a discussion, but I notice there's no new or changed test code with this PR .. would be interesting to get into why, and generally, what kind of PRs need tests and what kind don't
17:58 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: If you read the review comments tests were discussed
17:59 <LarryRuane> ok thanks (hadn't done that, will do)
17:59 <michaelfolkson> duncandean is working on tests it appears
17:59 <michaelfolkson> I think everyone agrees it should have tests
18:00 <glozow> shameless plug: if you're interested in same-txid-diff-wtxid stuff, i also recommend https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/22253
18:00 <LarryRuane> often the tests are harder to write than the code being tested, I've noticed!
18:00 <glozow> that's all we have time for :)
18:00 <glozow> #endmeeting
18:00 <glozow> This is a test: https://github.com/glozow/bitcoin/commit/5069a834ed06f2df5f43c416dc5a501c3b010b33
{% endirc %}
