---
layout: pr
date: 2021-01-06
title: "Only support compact blocks with witnesses"
pr: 20799
authors: [jnewbery]
components: ["p2p"]
host: jnewbery
status: past
commit: f8ff628
---

## Notes

- Compact blocks are a way to relay blocks across the Bitcoin P2P network with
  reduced bandwidth usage. They can also reduce block propagation latency when
  used in BIP152 _high-bandwidth_ mode.
  [BIP152](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0152.mediawiki) is the
  specification for compact blocks.

- BIP152 was originally developed and deployed before segwit was activated;
  Bitcoin Core's implementation was merged in [PR
  8068](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8068) and included in the v0.13.0
  release. The specification was made extensible so that compact blocks could be
  used for non-witness serialized blocks (version 1) and witness serialized
  blocks (version 2).

- Segwit ([BIP141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki)) was
  activated in August 2017. Every version of Bitcoin Core since v0.13.1 supports
  segwit and will fully validate blocks according to the BIP141 consensus
  rules. To fully validate a block with segwit transactions, it must be
  serialized with witnesses.

- Version 1 (non-witness) compact blocks are therefore no longer useful to peers on the
  network. This PR removes support for serving version 1 compact blocks.

## Questions

1. How does using compact blocks save bandwidth? What data is not downloaded
   when relaying blocks using compact blocks?

2. What is BIP152 high-bandwidth mode? How many of our peers can we choose to be
   high-bandwidth peers?

3. How do we choose which peers should be high-bandwidth peers? In which
   function does that logic exist?

4. If a peer chooses us to be its high-bandwidth peer, how does it signal
   that to us?

5. BIP152 states: "high-bandwidth mode permits relaying of CMPCTBLOCK messages
   prior to full validation (requiring only that the block header is valid
   before relay)." In which `PeerManager` function do we relay compact blocks
   to peers that have chosen us to be a high-bandwidth peer?

6. How is that `PeerManager` function invoked? In which thread is it called?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
18:00 <jnewbery> #startmeeting
18:00 <emzy> hi
18:00 <jnewbery> Hi folks. Welcome to the first Bitcoin Core PR Review Club of 2021 🎉
18:00 <jarolrod> hi
18:00 <schmidty> Hi!
18:00 <troygior1hev> hi
18:00 <ccdle12> hi
18:00 <Legousk> Hello!
18:00 <lightlike> hi
18:00 <theStack> hi
18:00 <andozw> hiiii
18:00 <elle> hi!
18:00 <joelklabo> good morning 👋
18:00 <anir> hey everyone!
18:00 <AnthonyRonning> Hi all!
18:00 <amiti> hello!
18:00 <felixweis> hi!
18:00 <larryruane_> hi!
18:00 <jnewbery> I hope you all had a good break, and are feeling ready to learn even more about Bitcoin Core this year :)
18:00 <jnewbery> feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
18:00 <sunon> Hey!! Elle yay!
18:01 <norisg> Hi !
18:01 <fodediop> hi
18:01 <willcl_ark> hi
18:01 <jnewbery> Notes and questions are in the normal place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/20799
18:01 <elle> hey sunon! :)
18:01 <glozow> hi!
18:01 <michaelfolkson> hi
18:01 <jnewbery> Is anyone here for the first time?
18:01 <olympics> hi
18:01 <AnthonyRonning> first time here
18:01 <pinheadmz> hi
18:01 <jnewbery> Welcome AnthonyRonning! Thanks for joining us
18:01 <keyboardwarrior> hi :)
18:01 <sunon> Trying via a matrix.org proxy for the first time. Let’s see how this goes
18:01 <fodediop> Welcome Anthony! 🎉
18:01 <olympics> welcome AnthonyRonning
18:02 <AnthonyRonning> 🙌
18:02 <Caralie> hi :)  Welcome Anthony!
18:02 <thomasb06> hi
18:02 <jnewbery> A couple of reminders on the format: i have some prepared questions to guide the conversation, but feel free to jump in at any time. Don't worry if you have a question about something that we covered earlier or whatever.
18:03 <jnewbery> also, don't ask to ask. Just jump right in.
18:03 <jnewbery> we're all here to learn and all questions are welcome
18:03 <jnewbery> ok, onto the PR. Who had a chance to review it? (y/n)
18:03 <sunon> n
18:03 <joelklabo> y
18:03 <Legousk> n
18:03 <AnthonyRonning> y
18:03 <ccdle12> y
18:03 <troygior1hev> n
18:03 <fodediop> y
18:03 <norisg> n
18:03 <felixweis> n
18:03 <thomasb06> y
18:03 <willcl_ark> n
18:03 <pinheadmz> 1/2
18:03 <theStack> 0.5 y (did just skim over the commits w/o detailled code review)
18:04 <emzy> y/n
18:04 <Legousk> Where can I see beforehand which one will be reviewed?
18:04 <jnewbery> nice. No problem if you didn't have time this week
18:04 <elle> 0.5 y (spent most time on context)
18:04 <glozow> y-ish
18:04 <jarolrod> .5y
18:04 <lightlike> 1/2
18:04 <jnewbery> Legousk: they're announced on the website, usually the Friday before.
18:04 <olympics> Legousk https://bitcoincore.reviews/
18:04 <jnewbery> any initial thoughts about the PR? Concept ACK/NACKs?
18:04 <anir> 1.2
18:04 <anir> 1/2*
18:05 <AnthonyRonning> concept ack, love removing code
18:05 <nehan> hi
18:05 <sunon> Concept ACK
18:05 <jnewbery> YES! Removing code is the best!
18:05 <emzy> concept ack, not needed anymore.
18:05 <pinheadmz> ack yes
18:05 <jarolrod> concept ack makes sense
18:05 <thomasb06> not acquainted with the code enough
18:05 <Legousk> Thanks
18:05 <joelklabo> ack 👍
18:05 <theStack> concept ack!
18:05 <michaelfolkson> Concept ACK but remind me how many old versions it is Core policy to support?
18:05 <anir> Concept ack, streamlines the codebase
18:06 <jonatack> hi
18:06 <fodediop> Concept but still trying to digest the codebase
18:06 <fodediop> Ack
18:06 <michaelfolkson> 0.13 is pretty old
18:06 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: that's a very broad question. There are lots of different versionings (eg p2p protocol, wallet, file format, ...)
18:06 <jnewbery> First question. How does using compact blocks save bandwidth? What data is not downloaded when relaying blocks using compact blocks?
18:07 <ccdle12> the transactions aren't downloaded? it
18:07 <jarolrod> Compact Blocks only includes a short transaction id for each transaction contained within it. The node on the receiving end of a compact block must match a transaction id with a transaction in its mempool and reconstruct the full block. Since we are not sending all of the transaction data, we can reduce block relay bandwidth around ~90%
18:07 <sunon> Most of the actual transactions
18:07 <pinheadmz> full transaction data is not downloaded, just short IDs
18:07 <jnewbery> The BIP is here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0152.mediawiki
18:07 <pinheadmz> in hopes the recipient has the tx data already
18:07 <joelklabo>  transactions are assumed to be in the mempool already
18:07 <jonatack> Legousk: if you're on twitter, you can get updates by following https://twitter.com/BitcoinCorePRs
18:07 <michaelfolkson> jnewbery: For this type of p2p change how many old versions should be supported?
18:07 <thomasb06> only the transactions missing are transmitted
18:07 <thomasb06> the block isn't
18:07 <emzy> We only send the block header and short IDs of the transactions. If the peer has all the transactions in the mempool it can reconstruct the block without additional data.
18:07 ℹ  sdaftuar_ is now known as sdaftuar
18:08 <sunon> Some transaction predicted to not be known to receiver are transmitted too
18:08 <glozow> PrefilledTransactions for txns we expect the peer to be missing, e.g. the coinbase tx
18:08 <pinheadmz> michaelfolkson i think an important point is that no one will ever need version 1 compact blocks because the last non witness block was so long ago, and compacts only work for recent blocks
18:08 <Legousk> jonatack: I'm not on twitter, but will follow it tho
18:08 <emzy> pinheadmz: exactly.
18:08 <pinheadmz> even non upgraded nodes (non segwit) it wont affect them, they arent getting v1 compacts any more anyway
18:08 <jnewbery> Lots of great answers there. Yes, when the node sends a CMPCTBLOCK it'll include shortids for the transactions, and some prefilled transactions, including the coinbase
18:08 <michaelfolkson> pinheadmz: If you are running 0.13 and want to use compact blocks?
18:08 <pinheadmz> i still wont send them to you
18:08 <pinheadmz> the last non witness block was SO LONG ago, you definitely dont have those txs in your mempool :-)
18:09 <pinheadmz> and having tx in the mempool is required for compact blocks to be useful
18:09 <jnewbery> michaelfolkson: if you're running 0.13.0, then you're not enforcing all consensus rules
18:09 <sdaftuar> pinheadmz: that's not exactly right
18:09 <sipa> michaelfolkson: if you're running 0.13.0, yes; not 0.12.x (because it has no compact blocks), and not 0.13.1+ (because it has segwit activated)
18:10 <sdaftuar> pinheadmz: currently an 0.13.0 node could attempt to use compact block relay, and it would get short-ids based on txid rather than wtxid
18:10 <sunon> So it’s really only very specifically 0.13.0 that’s the weird case?
18:10 <olympics> so it only affects node IFF they run 0.13.0
18:10 <olympics> ?
18:10 <sipa> olympics: i believe so
18:10 <sdaftuar> pinheadmz: but you are right that reconstruction would always require a roundtrip because those witness transactions would be nonstadnard to an 0.13.0 node
18:10 <sdaftuar> however, the protocol would work
18:10 <sipa> (or any other codebase that behaves similarly)
18:10 <pinheadmz> sdaftuar i see ok thanks
18:10 <jnewbery> or theoretically some other implementation that implemented BIP 152 but not segwit
18:10 <jnewbery> maybe some old version of an alternative implementation
18:11 <sunon> Oh yes of course
18:11 <norisg> did the block structure also change with segwit, you are talking about "non witness blocks", non witness blocks have no segwit transactions in it?
18:11 <pinheadmz> sdaftuar non standard TXs require a roundtrip? even if the tx is in the mempool (by txid, not wtxid) ?
18:11 <sdaftuar> michaelfolkson: importantly, this doesn't fundamentally break blockrelay to 0.13.0 nodes -- just won't use compact blocks for it
18:11 <sdaftuar> so to your question about "supporting" older nodes, this change wouldn't cause 0.13.0 nodes to fall out of consensus
18:11 <jnewbery> norisg: yes, the serialization of blocks changed with segwit. See BIP 144 for details
18:12 <larryruane_> so a segwit block could happen to have no segwit transactions?
18:12 <olympics> sdaftuar the worst effect would be, marginally longer txn propagation to nodes on 0.13.0?
18:12 <sdaftuar> pinheadmz: well non-standard transactions are (by definition) not in the mempool -- so reconstruction would fail
18:12 <sdaftuar> olympics: yep
18:12 <olympics> ty
18:12 <sdaftuar> block propagation
18:12 <sipa> larryruane_: then by definition it is not a segwit block :)
18:12 <pinheadmz> sdaftuar ah yes yes ty
18:13 <sdaftuar> pinheadmz: (well we also have the extra pool, too -- but that is relatively small)
18:13 <olympics> sdaftuar should I have said block propagation not txn propagation ?
18:13 <sdaftuar> olympics: yes
18:14 <olympics> bc the shortID expedites relaying the txns in the block rather than shipping out txns the peer may already have
18:14 <jnewbery> Next question: What is BIP152 high-bandwidth mode? How many of our peers can we choose to be high-bandwidth peers?
18:14 <ccdle12> 3 peers as high bandwith, high-bandwith means the nodes send compacted blocks by default
18:15 <emzy> We send the compact block without the peer asking for it, also before we validated it ourself. Max is 3 peers.
18:15 <thomasb06> 2 max
18:15 <anir> peers send new block announcements with the short transaction IDs already via a cmpctblock message, and it’s enabled by setting the first boolean to 1 in a sendcmpct message
18:15 <AnthonyRonning> High bandwidth mode is available so that peers can receive blocks automatically and asap (`1.5 * RTT`), even before full block validation takes place.
18:15 <sunon> High bandwidth mode allows peers to send compact blocks without sending inv msg / asking permission
18:15 <willcl_ark> look like 3 peers
18:15 <jnewbery> olympics: tx relay (for unconfirmed transactions) is unaffected by this. compact blocks makes block propogation faster based on the observation that the receiver probably has most of the transactions in their mempool already
18:15 <pinheadmz> high bandwidth sends unannounced compcat block
18:15 <willcl_ark> from `MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs`
18:15 <jarolrod> high bandwidth mode is when you send cmpct blocks without asking for permission, can lead to higher bandwidth because you can receive the same block more than once, but reduced latency because potentially less round trips
18:15 <norisg> we are removing code, but no functionality ?
18:16 <pinheadmz> i was confused by this at first bc if oyu look at bip152 graphic "low bandwiwdth" appears to have more messages
18:16 <glozow> I got 3 from this line in MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/417f95fa453d97087a33d4176523ab278bef21a1/src/net_processing.cpp#L553
18:16 <thomasb06> high bandwidth mode means the nodes will only get the missing transactions
18:16 <lightlike> when it was introduced, why wasn't it decided to schedule compact blocks after segwit? Seems like a lot of effort for just one version 0.13.0
18:16 <sipa> norisg: wouldn't that be great? no, we are removing functionality: dropping support for the non-segwit version of compact blocks
18:16 <sunon> Also yeah only header needs to be validated before they’re sent in high bandwidth mode right?
18:16 <AnthonyRonning> one thing I was unsure of, bip152 says "Nodes MUST NOT send such sendcmpct messages to more than three peers" but sendcmpct can be for low bandwitdth too, so is the three limit total or high bandwidth?
18:16 <sipa> lightlike: things get merged when they're ready, and compact blocks did not require a softfork or anything
18:16 <sdaftuar> lightlike: segwit was also a big change, and it was unclear when it would be finally ready
18:16 <anir> upto 3 peers recommended I believe
18:17 <norisg> sipa because the probability of the block without segwit tx is aganist 0?
18:17 <theStack> it should not only affect 0.13.0 but also other higher versions that don't have activated segwit yet, right? (afair segwit came with v0.17, so there must be some versions v0.14.x and v0.15.x etc. with non-latest minor number that are affected)
18:17 <lightlike> ah ok, thanks!
18:17 <sipa> lightlike: so at the time it was included, it worked immediately on the network, and would keep doing so regardless of whether segwit activated or not (which turned out to be... uncertain for a while)
18:17 <sunon> I also believe I saw 3 peers max
18:17 <thomasb06> it's >= indeed
18:17 <sipa> norisg: no no
18:17 <sipa> norisg: the new protocol works even with non-segwit blocks
18:17 <jnewbery> ... or indeed if it would ever be activated. Segwit and compact blocks are indepedently good things, so it doesn't make sense to gate one on the other
18:17 <michaelfolkson> You just need one SegWit transaction for it to be a SegWit block
18:18 <sdaftuar> theStack: no, everything from 0.13.1 on is segwit aware/activated
18:18 <sipa> norisg: it should be less ambigious and say "segwit-supporting compact block version" and "non-segwit-supporting compact block version" perhaps
18:18 <theStack> sdaftuar: how so? in 0.14.0 there was no segwit
18:18 <sipa> theStack: there absolutely was
18:18 <sdaftuar> theStack: that is not true!
18:19 <theStack> ah, right
18:19 <sipa> theStack: wallet support for segwit came in 0.16 iirc, but that's unrelated
18:19 <ccdle12> i was curious what was the specific reason for a max of 3 high bandwith nodes?
18:19 <michaelfolkson> As pinheadmz said it must have been a long time since a mined block didn't have a single SegWit transaction
18:19 <norisg> sipa ok you you are saying that the "segwit-supporting compact block version" can also propagate non-segwit blocks?
18:19 <sunon> Is it not for DoS mitigation?
18:19 <jnewbery> theStack: the code for segwit was merged in bitcoin 0.13.1. Activation was later, but any node on 0.13.1 or higher can understand/validate/relay segwit blocks/txs
18:20 <theStack> for some reason i thought it was with 0.17, sorry :x
18:20 <sipa> norisg: correct
18:20 <jonatack> was afk, catching up, we can select up to 3, not 2, peers to be bip152 high-bandwidth
18:20 <norisg> and this pull request we are talking about implements "segwit-supporting compact block version"
18:20 <willcl_ark> ccdle12: as per BIP152: "Nodes MUST NOT send such sendcmpct messages to more than three peers, as it encourages wasting outbound bandwidth across the network."
18:21 <jnewbery> norisg: no. It removes support for non-segwit-supporting compact block version
18:21 <ccdle12> willcl_ark: thanks
18:21 <sipa> norisg: no; the current codebase supports both; what we're discussing is removing support for the "non-segwit-supporting compact block version"
18:21 <nR2Cncdm> Hello, my first time. Just lurking today. Hope to make an impact before I die!
18:21 <AnthonyRonning> that's what I'm confused about willcl_ark, doesn't low bandwidth send sendcmpct too?
18:21 <glozow> we can't tell if a node has more than 3, can we?
18:21 <nR2Cncdm> (i'm not expecting death btw)
18:21 <sipa> AnthonyRonning: yes, but with an extra roundtrip
18:21 <thomasb06> jonatack: yep, misread the code
18:21 <sipa> AnthonyRonning: the extra roundtrip means that the receiver only asks for the actual compact block once
18:22 <jnewbery> to everyone who answered "3 peers". You're right! Bonus point to Gloria for pointing out the line of code: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/417f95fa453d97087a33d4176523ab278bef21a1/src/net_processing.cpp#L553
18:22 <AnthonyRonning> sipa:  so the three limit applies to low too? not just high?
18:22 <jonatack> if you'd like to see your bip152 high-bandwidth peers in real time, they can be visualized with https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20764
18:22 <emzy> nR2Cncdm: good to hear. You will make an impect with the right mindset.
18:22 <sipa> AnthonyRonning: all the ones that are not hb are lb
18:22 <michaelfolkson> The message comparison is here AnthonyRonning: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0152.mediawiki#intended-protocol-flow
18:22 <jnewbery> The BIP RECOMMENDS that a node chooses up to 3 peers to request HB mode from: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0152.mediawiki#implementation-notes
18:23 <jnewbery> and that's exactly what Bitcoin Core implements
18:23 <troygior1hev> jonatack: nice!
18:23 <sipa> AnthonyRonning: the hb peers will just send the compact block without being asked for it; the lb peers will announce "hey i have a compact block for you, want it?" - and then the receiver gets to pick which of the lb peers to ask it from
18:23 <jonatack> or via getpeerinfo in master now that theStack's PR exposing these two fields was merged
18:23 <jnewbery> Next question (should be easy given the link above): How do we choose which peers should be high-bandwidth peers? In which function does that logic exist?
18:23 <AnthonyRonning> sipa: thanks!
18:23 <jonatack> troygior1hev: ty :)
18:23 <AnthonyRonning> High bandwidth mode is for peers that have a past performance in providing blocks quickly. I believe it exists in `MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs`
18:23 <norisg> sipa: what was the reason why we had to implement it in the first place, but did't remove it immediatly when introducing "segwit-supporting compact block version"
18:24 <pinheadmz> jnewbery in the updated code, if i send you SENDCMPCT with version 1, the function just returns. So you will not send me compact blocks - is my node "ok with this"? Or do we disconnect from peers that dont send compact blocks after we ask them to ?
18:24 <sipa> norisg: because it was necessary at the time; segwit wasn't active on the network
18:24 <norisg> thx sipa
18:24 <jnewbery> norisg: because there's no rush, and potentially there could have been peers on 0.13.0 who still wanted to use compact blocks
18:25 <michaelfolkson> norisg: Why remove functionality for 0.13.0 nodes if Core current version is 0.14?
18:25 <jnewbery> norisg: You may want to look at the motivation in the PR again. It answers a lot of your questions: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/20799
18:25 <thomasb06> the function is "connman.ForNode(.,.)"
18:25 <anir> I think peers be selected based on their past performance in providing blocks quickly
18:26 <willcl_ark> jnewbery: this is in src/net_processing.cpp#MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs called by PeerManager::BlockChecked
18:26 <pinheadmz> MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs sets `pfrom->m_bip152_highbandwidth_to = true;`
18:26 <jonatack> anir: right
18:27 <jonatack> for the peers our node chooses
18:27 <pinheadmz> high bandwidth peers are chosen if they are the first peer to inform us of a new block
18:27 <jnewbery> pinheadmz: Very good question. I think Bitcoin Core would be "ok with this", but it's maybe worth a quick check in the Bitcoin Core 0.13.0 code. If it's not ok with it, then maybe a polite disconnect would be better.
18:28 <AnthonyRonning> if I forked core to connect to all my peers with high bandwith mode, is that allowed? can the network see I have connected to more than 3?
18:29 <michaelfolkson> AnthonyRonning: No feel free!
18:29 <jnewbery> To those that answered BlockChecked -> MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs : you're right!
18:29 <sdaftuar> AnthonyRonning: no one is in charge...
18:29 <willcl_ark> AnthonyRonning: I don't think anyone except you would know, it's just bad practice
18:29 <sipa> AnthonyRonning: yes, you'll primarily be wasting your own bandwidth
18:29 <sunon> I don’t think that would be any issue
18:29 <thomasb06> arg...
18:29 <emzy> AnthonyRonning: I think there is no way. But what will you gain. Execpt of more bandwith incomming?
18:29 <jnewbery> AnthonyRonning: no-one can stop you, but the BIP says you shouldn't: Nodes MUST NOT send such sendcmpct messages to more than three peers, as it encourages wasting outbound bandwidth across the network.
18:30 <AnthonyRonning> 👍
18:30 <glozow> AnthonyRonning: If your question is whether nodes detect/punish this behavior I don't think they do
18:30 ⚡ emzy has unlimited bandwith on his node. Be my guest :)
18:30 <glozow> how would they 🤔
18:30 <AnthonyRonning> glozow: yeah!
18:30 <norisg> does the network equally distribute the high bath width connection, lets say we have 5 nodes on the network and each one of them is connected to the same other 3 in high band with, how do we get the other one in
18:30 <jnewbery> Any questions about BlockChecked() or MaybeSetPeerAsAnnouncingHeaderAndIDs()?
18:30 <sunon> I mean it’s ok to play a little haha
18:31 <jnewbery> How about this question: "Where does BlockChecked() get called from? On which thread?"
18:31 <ccdle12> ThreadMessageHandler
18:32 <ccdle12> ProcessNewBlock I think
18:33 <jnewbery> ccdle12: yes, it can be called from ProcessNewBlock
18:33 <jnewbery> it can also be called from ConnectTip, if we tried to connect the block, but it failed at that point (e.g. if it spent coins that didn't exist)
18:34 <larryruane_> thread b-loadblk? (validation)
18:34 <jnewbery> And yes, those functions will almost always be called on ThreadMessageHandler
18:34 <jnewbery> larryruane_: I think you might be right that it could also be on that thread
18:35 <norisg> ccdle12 which codefile and line ?
18:35 <jnewbery> the interesting thing to note here is that CheckBlock is one of the two validation interface callbacks that are called synchronously. Does anyone know the other one?
18:35 <glozow> where can I find all the threads? grep for std::thread ?
18:35 <ccdle12> norisg: net.cpp::CConnman::ThreadMessageHandler() and net_processing.cpp:ProcessMessage()
18:35 <norisg> thx ccdle12
18:36 <troygior1hev> This is useful for anyone wanting to explore the different threads:
18:36 <ccdle12> norisg: ProcessMessage() is hugh fyi lol
18:36 <troygior1hev> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md#threads
18:36 <glozow> <troygior1hev> big thank 🙏
18:36 <larryruane_> glozow I think a good way to do it actually is to run the debugger, set a bp, then see which thread you're on (info threads helps)
18:37 <jnewbery> troygior1hev: good tip!
18:37 <glozow> larryruane_ oo nice!
18:37 <jnewbery> Also, try running with -logthreadnames and look at your debug log
18:37 <jonatack> doc/developer-notes.md has a section on the threads
18:38 <pinheadmz> jnewbery tracing through net_processing I think the requesting node doesnt care if it gets a block instead of a compact block. Even if the inv has type MSG_CMPCT_BLOCK, the remote node just tests for IsGenBlkMsg which includes all block tpe messages, and then decides later to send compact or not
18:38 <jnewbery> especially with the validation category enabled, because then you can see the validation interface callbacks being set and fired
18:38 <jonatack> troygior1hev: what you wrote ^
18:38 <jnewbery> pinheadmz: thanks! Quick work
18:39 <jnewbery> ok, we can come back to the validation interface in a bit. Let's move on to the next question. If a peer chooses us to be its high-bandwidth peer, how does it signal that to us?
18:39 <emzy> Sending sendcmpct with first byte set to1 (true).
18:39 <theStack> by sending the SENDCMPCT message with its payload byte set to 1
18:39 <AnthonyRonning> sending a 1 in the `sendcmpct` command
18:39 <norisg> how do we test this compact block feature, there should already be test files I guess
18:40 <jnewbery> yes. exactly right. The first byte of sendcmpct is for high bandwidth mode.
18:40 <ccdle12> norisg: test/functional/p2p_compactblocks.py
18:40 <michaelfolkson> norisg: There is already a functional test which is changed in the PR
18:40 <jnewbery> norisg: good question. Take a look at the commits in the PR and see which functional test is being updated
18:40 <theStack> norisg: see test/functional/p2p_compatblocks.py
18:40 <theStack> *p2p_compactblocks.py
18:41 <jnewbery> Next question. BIP152 states: “high-bandwidth mode permits relaying of CMPCTBLOCK messages prior to full validation (requiring only that the block header is valid before relay).” In which PeerManager function do we relay compact blocks to peers that have chosen us to be a high-bandwidth peer?
18:41 <AnthonyRonning> I think `NewPoWValidBlock` , determined by the `m_sendcmpct_hb` flag
18:41 <jarolrod>  PeerManager::NewPOWValidBlock line 1250 of src/net_processing.cpp
18:42 <jnewbery> AnthonyRonning jarolrod: exactly right. It's in NewPOWValidBlock(). Can anyone tell me more about NewPOWValidBlock? Where is it called from?
18:43 <ccdle12> AcceptBlock()?
18:43 <AnthonyRonning> yeah that was my guess as well https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/c37600777eea9fc248ad0cffcc1a90df9af2410c/src/validation.cpp#L3741
18:44 <AnthonyRonning> not sure the thread info though, haven't reviewed the threads doc yet
18:44 <jnewbery> yeah, AcceptBlock() has this call: `GetMainSignals().NewPoWValidBlock(pindex, pblock)`. What does that mean?
18:44 <norisg> why is propagation more important than verification
18:45 <larryruane_> Is it because that function is going to run in a different thread?
18:45 <ccdle12> actually that's something I was studying earlier, GetMainSignals() gets called in init.cpp, so is it like a main thread in a way?
18:45 <jnewbery> larryruane_: good guess. You're almost there
18:45 <larryruane_> (I meant the GetMainSignals)
18:45 <jarolrod> norisg: block propagation is important to prevent network splits
18:46 <sipa> norisg: it's not; but verification takes time, and latency on the network is important, so we want blocks to be able to propagate without suffering a delay from validation at every hop
18:46 <sipa> ccdle12: validation.cpp and net_processing.cpp together used to be main.cpp; i think that's where the name comes from
18:47 <ccdle12> sipa: aahh interesting, thanks
18:47 <larryruane_> also we don't want to give anyone an incentive to run a modified client
18:47 <jnewbery> ok, GetMainSignals is the way that validation fires a validation interface notification
18:47 <glozow> at this point though we've already verified the PoW, which would be very hard to fake, so it's not as risky right?
18:48 <larryruane_> john could you elaborate a bit?
18:48 <emzy> I think a valid Block header is enough to be relayed. It is enough work to come up with one.
18:48 <norisg> sipa: how long do we allow peers to send us false blocks until we close the connection
18:48 <jnewbery> other components subscribe to those notifications. Look for any class that inherits the CValidationInterface interface to see examples
18:48 <norisg> in high band with mode
18:48 <sdaftuar> glozow: yep the PoW prevents DoS. however it's worth looking at what happens if a block is invalid
18:48 <sipa> norisg: it is very expensive for them to do so, due to PoW
18:49 <sipa> (even unvalidated blocks must pass PoW)
18:49 <norisg> sipa perfect thanks
18:49 <jnewbery> many of those notifications are asynchronous (i.e. validation sends them, and then the subscibers get notified by a background thread), but there are a couple that are synchronous (i.e. the subscribers are called directly by the thread in validation)
18:49 <jnewbery> BlockChecked was one synchronous callback. What's the other?
18:50 <jnewbery> They're defined in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/68196a891056f98c1df0debacf09fb2ea4682a43/src/validationinterface.h
18:51 <jonatack> jnewbery: i'd gladly review a commit adding that info in a GetMainSignals() doxygen doc in validationinterface.h
18:51 <pinheadmz> sdaftuar glozow related: i dont see in net_processing how we deal with unsolicited BLOCK messages? is that not a DoS risk?
18:52 <jnewbery> look for "called on a background thread"
18:52 <AnthonyRonning> ah so NewPoWValidBlock is sync too then?
18:52 <jnewbery> YES!
18:53 <jnewbery> AnthonyRonning: correct
18:53 <jnewbery> why do you think that is?
18:53 <larryruane_> ChainStateFlushed() also
18:53 <glozow> pinheadmz: I suppose we check blocks in an order that prioritizes failing early
18:53 <jnewbery> ChainStateFlushed is asynchronous
18:54 <glozow> i.e. first non-contextual and look at PoW before doing any expensive verification
18:54 <AnthonyRonning> does BlockChecked not call NewPoWValidBlock? So they'd both be sync?
18:54 <pinheadmz> glozow ah yeah i thikn i see in CChainState::AcceptBlock() if we didnt request the block we check chainwork in the header before anything
18:54 <jnewbery> AnthonyRonning: No. NewPOWValidBlock is called by AcceptBlock()
18:55 <glozow> i think we do that for blocks we did request too, right?
18:55 <jnewbery> The reason it's important is that we want to send out the high-bandwidth compact blocks as quickly as possible
18:55 ℹ  sanketcell_ is now known as sanketcell
18:55 <larryruane_> Why is there such a thing as synchronous notifications? How is that different from just a normal function call?
18:55 <pinheadmz> glozow sorry we just check against nMinimumChainWork
18:55 <jnewbery> so we immediately (synchronously) call the NewPoWValidBlock() callback in net_processing, which sends the cmpctblock message out immediately
18:56 <jnewbery> larryruane_: validation doesn't hold a reference/pointer to peermanager. Everything that peermanager gets from validation is through the validation interface
18:56 <AnthonyRonning> interesting, so do async notifications go through a queue of some sort? And calling it syncronously skips that?
18:57 <jnewbery> AnthonyRonning: basically yes, async notifications are all serviced on the background scheduler thread
18:57 <nehan> jnewbery: so the documentation that NewPoWValidBlock is synchronous vs asynchronous is the fact that it does *not* have "Called in a background thread" in its defn comments in validationinterface.h?
18:57 <nehan> how else might one confirm that?
18:57 <jnewbery> whereas synchronous notifications are just regular function calls by the thread that's doing the validation
18:58 <AnthonyRonning> gotcha, very cool, thanks
18:58 <nehan> just that its function doesn't call ENQUEUE_AND_LOG_EVENT?
18:58 <jnewbery> nehan: that's the documentation, yes! You could look in validationinterface.cpp to see how those notifications are invoked, or you could run a node with thread debug logs enabled and validation category debug logs enabled and see which threads are servicing the validation interface callbacks
18:59 <jnewbery> We've covered the last question already (How is that PeerManager function invoked? In which thread is it called?)
18:59 <jnewbery> And that's about time.
19:00 <jnewbery> Next week, dhruv is hosting on PR 19825. We'll have notes up by Friday.
19:00 <jnewbery> Thanks everyone!
19:00 <jnewbery> #endmeeting
19:00 <pinheadmz> thanks jnewbery !
19:00 <theStack> thanks for hosting jnewbery
19:00 <AnthonyRonning> thank you!
19:00 <troygior1hev> thanks jnewbery!
19:00 <olympics> thanks jnewbery
19:00 <norisg> thank you !
19:00 <ccdle12> thanks jnewbery
19:00 <thomasb06> thanks jnewbery
19:00 <emzy> Thank you jnewbery and all others. Happy, healthy and productive 2021 to you all.
19:00 <lightlike> thanks jnewbery
19:00 <glozow> thanks jnewbery!
19:00 <fodediop> Thanks jnewbery!
19:00 <larryruane_> thank you all, this was great!
19:00 <anir> Thanks jnewbery and everyone else!
19:01 <jarolrod> thanks
{% endirc %}
