---
layout: pr
date: 2021-05-05
title: "Use Single Random Draw in addition to knapsack as coin selection fallback"
pr: 17526
authors: [achow101]
components: ["wallet"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: fac99dc
---

## Notes

- [[Coin selection]] refers to the process of selecting  UTXOs (or "coins") from
  a wallet's available UTXO pool to fund a transaction. Generally, the goal is
  to pick coins that will minimize fees for the user (now and in the long run),
  help the transaction reliably confirm in a timely manner, and not leak
  information about the wallet. [This Stack Exchange
  post](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/32145/what-are-the-trade-offs-between-the-different-algorithms-for-deciding-which-utxo/32445#32445)
  offers an overview of tradeoffs between different coin selection
  strategies. We covered coin selection in a previous review club,
  [#17331](/17331).

- [PR #17526](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17526) implements [[Single Random Draw (SRD)]] 
  as an additional fallback [[coin selection]] strategy. SRD is
  fairly straightforward: it randomly picks `OutputGroup`s from a pool of
  eligible UTXOs until the total amount is sufficient to cover the payment and
  fees. Any extra funds are put in a change output.

- This means that, with this PR, our [[coin selection]] will have three different
  solvers: Branch and Bound (BnB), Knapsack, and Single Random Draw (SRD). Note
  that some randomness is used in coin selection, so we won't always come up
  with the same solution.

- The overall strategy within
  [SelectCoins()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2424)
  (including [[PR#17331]], on which PR #17526 is built):

  - Coins manually selected by the user using `CoinControl` are added first.

  - All available coins (excluding the pre-selected ones) are gathered.
	`CoinEligibilityFilter`s are used to filter these coins within
	`SelectCoinsMinConf()`.  We have a clear hierarchy of which coin selection
	solutions are preferred: we first try with a restriction of at least 6
	confirmations on foreign UTXOs and 1 confirmation on our own UTXOs.  If no
	solution is found, we try with at least 1 confirmation on all UTXOs. If that
	doesn't work and the user allows spending unconfirmed change, we try that
	(still requiring at least 1 confirmation on foreign UTXOs), gradually
	increasing mempool ancestor limits on the unconfirmed change.

  - Within
	[SelectCoinsMinConf()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/4ac1adda9914d845aaea5804af4801ffec53c701/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2395),
	`OutputGroup`s are created using the `CoinEligibilityFilter`. There is a
	clear preference for BnB and we will only try Knapsack and SRD if that
	fails.  However, we'll try both Knapsack and SRD together, picking the
	solution with lower fees, breaking ties by number of UTXOs used.

## Questions

1. Can you give a high-level description of the coin selection strategy
   including the changes proposed in this PR?

2. Within `SelectCoinsMinConf()`, if we have both a Knapsack and an SRD
   solution, how do we decide which one to use?

3. Why might we prefer to spend more inputs in the same transaction?

4. Quiz: Based on the coin selection scheme proposed here, let's say that
   Solutions A, B, and C exist (ignore the fact that we would exit early after
   finding a solution we're satisfied with). Which would we pick?  (Hint: which
   invocation of `SelectCoinsMinConf()` would each of these come from?)

    Solution A: picked using Knapsack. Produces a change output, pays 100
    satoshis in fees, and only uses confirmed UTXOs, each with 4 confirmations.

    Solution B: picked using BnB. No change output, pays 95 satoshis in fees,
    and uses one unconfirmed change output.

    Solution C: picked using SRD. Produces a change output, pays 99 satoshis in
    fees, and only uses confirmed UTXOs, each with 1 confirmation.

5. What are [[OutputGroup]]s?
   Why does SRD pick from output groups rather than from UTXOs?

6. What does calling `GroupOutputs()` with `positive_only=true` do (Hint: you
   may want to review what effective values are)? What could happen if
   `SelectCoinsSRD()` was called with `all_groups` instead of `positive_groups`?

7. What are some ways a deterministic coin selection algorithm might leak
   information about the wallet's UTXO pool? Why do we
   [shuffle](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2b45cf0b/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2503)
   `vCoins` before creating [[OutputGroup]]s?

8. Bonus: We've listed some qualitative (e.g. presence of a change output) and
   quantitative (e.g. number of inputs used) ways to compare coin selection
   solutions. Instead of returning as soon as `SelectCoinsMinConf()` finds a
   solution, should we try multiple and then pick one? How might we design a
   metric to decide which one to use?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
19:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
19:00 <jnewbery> hi!
19:00 <Guest13> hi
19:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR Review Club everybody! We're doing Coin Selection, Part 2 this week!
19:00 <larryruane_> hi!
19:00 <glozow> Notes and questions are at https://bitcoincore.reviews/17526
19:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
19:00 <hernanmarino> hi glozow and everyone !
19:00 <glozow> hi hernanmarino!
19:00 <lightlike> hi
19:00 <kouloumos> hi
19:01 <glozow> PR for today is #17526: Use Single Random Draw in addition to knapsack as coin selection fallback
19:01 <murch> hi
19:01 <darius58> hi!
19:01 <emzy> hi
19:02 <Anthony85> 👋
19:02 <glozow> Note that this PR is built on top of #17331, which we covered last week in PR Review Club. It should still be follow-along-able if you weren't here, but those notes could be helpful: https://bitcoincore.reviews/17331
19:02 <glozow> did y'all get a chance to review the PR? y/n
19:03 <michaelfolkson> y ~30 mins
19:03 <emzy> n
19:03 <mixoflatsixo> n
19:03 <dkf> n
19:03 <lightlike> a bit
19:04 <darius58> a bit
19:04 <jnewbery> y
19:05 <glozow> No problem :) let's do some high-level review for starters then. Would anyone like to tell us what Single Random Draw does?
19:05 <murch> y
19:05 <larryruane_> chooses a random set of UTXOs to use as the inputs to a transaction that we're creating
19:05 <hernanmarino> it randomly picks some outputs, until there's enough
19:05 <glozow> hernanmarino: yes!
19:06 <schmidty> hi!
19:06 <glozow> Can someone give a high-level description of the coin selection strategy including the changes proposed in this PR?
19:06 <michaelfolkson> If nothing else works let randomness save the day
19:07 <lightlike> BnB first - if it gives no solution, run both Knapsack and SRD and use whatever is "better".
19:07 <glozow> lightlike: yes!
19:07 <michaelfolkson> "better" defined as lower fees
19:07 <glozow> what constitutes "better" ?
19:07 <larryruane_> and I think try BnB first because if it is able to find a solution, there's no change output, which is nice
19:07 <glozow> Hint, Code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fac99dcaf33f1fe77b60cb8b0a89b0d47f842d0d/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2419
19:07 <darius58> and then if fees are equal, whichever spends more utxos
19:08 <glozow> larryruane_: yes! why is it good to have no change output?
19:08 <glozow> darius58: yep yep!
19:09 <jonatack> hi
19:09 <murch> Because it uses less fees, reduces the overall UTXO in the system, does not put any funds into flight in a change output, and breaks the change heuristic
19:10 <glozow> murch: indeed. wanna define "change heuristic" for us?
19:11 <michaelfolkson> The assumption that there is always an output which is effectively change back to the spender
19:11 <murch> A bunch of the chainalysis techniques revolve around guessing which output is the change returning excess funds from the input selection to the sender
19:12 <murch> When guessed correctly, this can be used to cluster future transactions with this one to build a wallet profile
19:12 <glozow> so there's a privacy component too!
19:12 <murch> by not returning any funds to the sender's wallet, there are future transactions directly related to this transaction (unless addresses are reused)
19:12 <glozow> back to the tie-breaking scheme, why might we want spend more utxos?
19:13 <darius58> to reduce the utxo bloat?
19:13 <lightlike> murch: are *no* future transactions?
19:13 <michaelfolkson> Taking advantage of a low fee environment to consolidate the number of UTXOs held
19:13 <glozow> darius58: yeah! why is that good for our wallet? and why is that good for the bitcoin ecosystem in general?
19:14 <Anthony85> I'm a complete newbie but maybe it just helps ensure that the entire ecosystem doesn't have to work as hard?
19:14 <michaelfolkson> Or maybe a large UTXO in the wallet is protected for privacy reasons and so a bunch of smaller UTXOs are used instead
19:14 <b10c> hi!
19:14 <larryruane_> i've always wondered, if the HD wallet sends change to a brand new address (as it should), does that harm privacy immediately? Or only later when the change is spent? (sorry if this is off-topic by now)
19:15 <darius58> reduces the memory demand for nodes keeping track of the UTXO set. I'm not sure why it's good for the user's wallet. Reduces future fees, plus less UTXOs to keep track of?
19:15 <glozow> Anthony85: good start, work as hard to do what?
19:15 <murch> lightlike: Without a change output and under the assumption of no address reuse, all future inputs would be unrelated to this transaction's inputs.
19:15 <murch> oooh
19:15 <murch> yes "+no"
19:16 <lightlike> murch: ok, then it makes perfect sense to me :-)
19:16 <glozow> darius58: yes good answer!
19:16 <sipa> larryruane_: the HD aspect is immaterial to your question
19:16 <glozow> keeping the UTXO set as small as possible is pretty important
19:17 <murch> darius58: Yes, not creating a change output saves cost now, and then also saves the future cost of spending that UTXO at a later time!
19:17 <glozow> for user's wallet, it's a bit less significant but a similar idea, it'd be nice to have to track/spend fewer UTXOs
19:17 <darius58> @murch my only question though is whether it is cheaper than another solution with less UTXOs in the input, if they had the same fee at the current moment?
19:17 <glozow> and as murch mentioned before, a change output is an additional unconfirmed UTXO we have to track (until the tx confirms)
19:18 <murch> larryruane_: It's a bit more complicated, but e.g. if two different scripts are used for recipient and change, it would still be obvious which one would be change if there is change
19:18 <glozow> alright, Quiz time! Based on the coin selection scheme proposed here, let's say that Solutions A, B, and C   exist (ignore the fact that we would exit early after finding a solution we're satisfied with). Which would we pick?
19:18 <murch> darius58: Kinda depends, at low feerates you should probably prefer more inputs, at high feerates you should probably prefer less fees
19:18 <glozow> 	 Solution A: picked using Knapsack. Produces a change output, pays 100 satoshis in fees, and only uses confirmed UTXOs, each with 4 confirmations.
19:18 <glozow> 	Solution B: picked using BnB. No change output, pays 95 satoshis in fees, and uses one unconfirmed change output.
19:18 <glozow> 	Solution C: picked using SRD. Produces a change output, pays 99 satoshis in fees, and only uses confirmed UTXOs, each with 1 confirmation.
19:19 <Anthony47> B?
19:19 <glozow> We have 1 vote for B. What do others think?
19:19 <lightlike> I'll try C.
19:19 <darius58> Does it depend if the unconfirmed output in B is an owned change output?
19:20 <sipa> does the answer not depend on predicted ftuture feerate?
19:20 <darius58> i'm guessing C
19:20 <glozow> they're all using the same feerates
19:20 <emzy> I guess B
19:20 <glozow> (sorry if that wasn't clear)
19:20 <michaelfolkson> C too. B's problem is it uses an unconfirmed change output?
19:21 <michaelfolkson> min confirmations by default is 1?
19:22 <glozow> darius58: would we spend any other type of unconfirmed output?
19:22 <glozow> michaelfolkson: right, the relevant code is here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fac99dcaf33f1fe77b60cb8b0a89b0d47f842d0d/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2536
19:22 <glozow> The key parts to look at are the `CoinEligibilityFilter`s
19:23 <murch> larryruane_: let's chat later after the meeting
19:23 <glozow> (1, 6, 0)
19:23 <glozow> (1, 1, 0)
19:23 <glozow> (1, 2, 0)
19:23 <glozow> ...etc
19:23 <michaelfolkson> So prefer 6 confirmations but 1 is ok
19:23 <Anthony47> ahh interesting so B would be used if there was 1 confirmed?
19:23 <glozow> we'll get to the answer to the quiz shortly (everyone feel free to give you answers as we discuss this)
19:23 <kouloumos> michaelfolkson And it becomes 0 on a later invocation so according to the *Hint* I'll also say C
19:23 <darius58> @glozow yeah my question didn't make sense lol, of course a change output means of course it was created by the user
19:23 <glozow> michaelfolkson: correct, we try 6 confirmations on foreign outputs
19:24 <glozow> so the first number in `CoinEligibilityFilter` corresponds to the # of confirmations on foreign outputs
19:24 <glozow> wait no
19:24 <glozow> that's our own outputs
19:24 <glozow> the second number is foreign outputs, sorry
19:25 <glozow> so the second number is always at least 1
19:25 <larryruane_> I think B because if BnB finds a solution, that's it, we don't even run the other 2 algorithms
19:25 <glozow> which means we always use confirmed foreign outputs
19:25 <michaelfolkson> larryruane_: "(ignore the fact that we would exit early after finding a solution we're satisfied with"
19:25 <glozow> ok, so it seems like we have 3 votes for B and 3 votes for C so far
19:26 <Anthony47> I'll stick with my guns (B) but I'm starting to think it is C lol
19:26 <glozow> hehe
19:26 <lightlike> would be funny if the answer is A
19:26 <michaelfolkson> What's the importance of the foreign output? The danger it could be double spent? If it is an output we own we know we won't double spend ourselves?
19:26 <glozow> so, in this code block, which invocation of `SelectCoinsMinConf()` gets Solution B, and which one gets C?
19:26 <sipa> michaelfolkson: exactly
19:26 <glozow> this block: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fac99dcaf33f1fe77b60cb8b0a89b0d47f842d0d/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2536-L2567
19:27 <glozow> You can answer by just saying which `CoinEligibilityFilter` it's called with
19:27 <glozow> michaelfolkson: yep. if the foreign wallet creates another conflicting transaction and that gets confirmed, those UTXOs disappear
19:29 <glozow> Ok, so I'll answer for Solution A since that's the least popular: we'd pick that using `CoinEligibilityFilter(1, 1, 0)`.
19:29 <lightlike> imo, the second call (1, 1, 0) gets A and C, and uses C because of the lower feerate
19:29 <glozow> lightlike: bingo!
19:29 <murch> So, Solution A and Solution C should be found in the second pass of the eligibility filter but C pays less fees. B uses an unconfirmed input which happens in a later iteration of SelectCoinsMinConf, i.e. vote for C
19:30 <glozow> yes, we get B from a call that uses `CoinEligibilityFilter(0, 1, *)`
19:30 <glozow> because it has unconfirmed change outputs (that's the 0 in the filter)
19:30 <glozow> so what's the answer to the quiz? :)
19:30 <murch> C!
19:30 <glozow> ding ding ding!
19:30 <glozow> can everybody see how we got that answer? are there any questions?
19:31 <glozow> (and yes, the next best answer would be A, then B)
19:31 <darius58> great question and explanation!
19:31 <Anthony47> Is there ever a scenario that B would get selected?
19:31 <michaelfolkson> Fun question. The real winner here is glozow
19:31 <glozow> Anthony47: yes, if an invocation of `SelectCoinsMinConf()` fails, we try again with a more permissive filter
19:32 <Anthony47> gotcha, thanks!
19:32 <glozow> but I guess this question is crafted as "all these solutions exist"
19:32 <glozow> so it wouldn't fail
19:32 <glozow> er, so, no
19:32 <glozow> oops
19:33 <glozow> (sorry, i just gave a really confusing answer to your question)
19:33 <glozow> Ok let's continue with the questions
19:33 <glozow> What are OutputGroups? Why does SRD pick from output groups rather than from UTXOs?
19:34 <michaelfolkson> An unconfirmed output would be chosen if there was no alternative, I think the answer to Anthony47 question is
19:34 <glozow> link to code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fac99dcaf33f1fe77b60cb8b0a89b0d47f842d0d/src/wallet/coinselection.h#L120
19:34 <michaelfolkson> (assuming not foreign)
19:34 <darius58> OutputGroups are UTXOs with the same scriptPubkey. And we'd rather spend those together for better privacy and security
19:35 <glozow> michaelfolkson: yeah, good summary
19:36 <glozow> darius58: yes, I think that's correct
19:36 <larryruane_> i'm surprised an OutputGroup doesn't contain the scriptPubKey as a member
19:37 <glozow> indeed, we compute these groups on the fly during coin selection using `GroupOutputs()`
19:37 <glozow> you could pass in `separate_coins=true` which would put each UTXO in its own outputgroup
19:38 <glozow> I wonder if it would be better to keep the UTXOs pre-sorted or something
19:38 <glozow> anyway
19:39 <glozow> Next question: What does calling `GroupOutputs()` with `positive_only=true` do (Hint: you may want to review what effective values are)? What could happen if `SelectCoinsSRD()` was called with `all_groups` instead of `positive_groups`?
19:40 <glozow> does anyone who came to review club last week wanna tell us what effective values are?
19:40 <darius58> does it not include UTXOs with a negative effective value?
19:40 <glozow> darius58: jup
19:41 <murch> effective values are the value of inputs after deducting the input cost at the current selection attempt's feerate
19:41 <glozow> murch: good job attending last week's review club! could you break down for us, then, what it means for a coin to have a negative effective feerate?
19:42 <lightlike> so we'd use groups that spend more fees than their UTXOs are worth and burn money.
19:42 <glozow> lightlike: exactly. and why would this suck if we're doing a single random draw?
19:42 <michaelfolkson> (inside joke, murch hosted last week's review club :) )
19:43 <michaelfolkson> https://bitcoincore.reviews/17331
19:43 <murch> lightlike: Does it group only UTXOs with positive values or does it only allow groups that are positive in sum or does it only create groups from scriptPubKeys that only have positively valued utxos?
19:43 <glozow> big perks for returning review clubbies, u get jokes 😛
19:44 <lightlike> murch: I thought the criterium would be to be positive in sum, but I am not sure at all.
19:45 <darius58> @murch the first one you said: group only UTXOs with positive value
19:45 <michaelfolkson> So a negative effective feerate, it is effectively dust? It costs more to spend than the value of the output?
19:46 <darius58> @glozow it would suck because there would be some cases where SRD would fail because it couldn't reach a high enough amount, even if it could have by not including negative-effective value UTXOs
19:47 <murch> michaelfolkson: People use "dust" to denominate various things. Some people refer to UTXOs that are uneconomic at 3 sat/vB as dust, some refer to UTXOs that are uneconomic at the current feerate as dust, some just seem to call anything below e.g. 2000 sats dust.
19:47 <murch> darius58: Excellent thinking :)
19:47 <glozow> michaelfolkson: it's worse than dust, we'd need to select even more inputs to cover the extra cost
19:48 <glozow> darius58: yes! you could literally be increasing the value you need to select while drawing
19:48 <michaelfolkson> murch: I was thinking that. Need an authoritative definition of dust. Thanks
19:48 <lightlike> also, we might spend a LOT of dust by repeately choosing negative ouputgroups if we have many, and pay a lot of unnecessary fees.
19:48 <murch> michaelfolkson: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/41082/5406
19:49 <michaelfolkson> murch: Cool
19:49 <glozow> let's talk a little bit about the benefits of single random draw
19:49 <michaelfolkson> Lovely 2013 comment "Considering 0.01BTC as dust is probably outdated" lol
19:50 <murch> lightlike: Or if the currentfeerate is just extremely high, a lot of the otherwise fine UTXOs are suddenly uneconomic
19:50 <glozow> What are some ways a deterministic coin selection algorithm might leak information about the wallet's UTXO pool?
19:50 <glozow> A fun read on coin selection algos and their tradeoffs: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/32145/what-are-the-trade-offs-between-the-different-algorithms-for-deciding-which-utxo/32445#32445
19:51 <murch> haha
19:51 <murch> I was just going to link to that
19:51 <michaelfolkson> StackExchange and coin selection is the perfect mix
19:52 <glozow> sometimes when i type stackexchange it autocorrects to "Murch's blog"
19:52 <lightlike> that link kind of answers that question :)
19:53 <michaelfolkson> glozow: Without giving specifics if a coin analysis/surveillance company knows how you are coin selecting (no randomness) they get a better idea of what output(s) are yours?
19:53 <murch> So, some coin selection strategies for example reveal the oldest UTXOs or the largest UTXOs. In the combination of address reuse or clustering via change output heuristics, or other wallet fingerprints, this can allow a sufficiently motivated adversary to guess the amount of coins, payment frequency and other things
19:53 <glozow> oops, yeah. so SRD avoids any privacy leaks related to picking coins deterministically
19:53 <murch> SRD selecting randomly muddles some of these
19:54 <michaelfolkson> Some randomness kinda obfuscates things
19:55 <murch> oh, 2014 murch thought that address reuse saved input costs. Gonna have to edit that.
19:55 <michaelfolkson> Bad 2014 murch
19:55 <glozow> To be thorough... Why do we shuffle `vCoins` before creating OutputGroups?
19:55 <lightlike> if SRD encounters a large outgroup first by chance, will it just stop, use that and create a big change?
19:55 <glozow> Hint: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2b45cf0bcdb3d2c1de46899e30885c953b57b475/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2503
19:55 <murch> lightlike: Yes!
19:56 <murch> oh yeah, that's another thing. Due to the random selection the distribution of change output sizes is not as homogenuous
19:56 <glozow> Hint 2: Remember how we talked about the fact that SRD picks randomly from `OutputGroup`s, not singular UTXOs?
19:56 <murch> E.g. Knapsack always tries to create the same change output size which is a terrible give-away
19:56 <murch> Also, having many UTXO of the same size isn't really useful
19:57 <michaelfolkson> Unless you want to do some coinjoining?
19:57 <glozow> michaelfolkson: not with your own wallet
19:57 <lightlike> murch: that sounds less than ideal to me for some use cases: if I want to pay for a small thing, I wouldn't necessarily want to make public how rich I am (if I have some large outgroups)
19:58 <darius14> If they're not shuffled then the order of the inputs may reveal information about how they were sorted?
19:58 <murch> glozow: Actually that kinda sounds like a bug, that means that outputgroups are more likely to be picked.
19:58 <murch> It would be better to create the output groups first, then shuffle the output groups, then shuffle the UTXOs in the group
19:58 <glozow> darius14: yep! we wouldn't want to make the groups deterministically if we had more than 11 UTXOs for the same SPK
19:58 <michaelfolkson> glozow: No but maybe you are organizing your UTXOs in preparation to do some future coinjoining with other people's UTXOs. I dunno
19:59 <darius14> is there something specific about '11' in that comment, or it just means for a lot of UTXOs?
19:59 <glozow> murch: if you had 500 UTXOs for the same SPK, if you didn't shuffle them first, you'd always make the same groups
19:59 <glozow> darius14: the maximum number of UTXOs for a `OutputGroup` is 10 right now
19:59 <murch> lightlike: that's a good point, but generally you'll have a lot more smaller UTXOs than large UTXOs, so it would be somewhat uncommon. Also if you use a small input, you'll need multiple or get back tiny change, which are also suboptimal
20:00 <glozow> relevant: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418
20:00 <murch> darius14: I think that's a reference to outputgroups being limited to 10 UTXOs currently
20:00 <murch> there is a PR open to push it to 100, though
20:01 <darius14> @murch oh i see, and why are output groups limited to 10 UTXOs?
20:01 <jonatack> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/18418
20:01 <glozow> OMG
20:01 <murch> glozow: oh good point. I guess shuffle UTXOs first, make OutputGroups, then shuffle OutputGroups is what I mean then.
20:01 <glozow> WE RAN OUT OF TIME OOPS
20:01 <glozow> #endmeeting
20:01 <murch> uh oh
20:02 <glozow> thanks for coming everyone!
20:02 <murch> Thanks, glozow!
20:02 <jonatack> o/
20:02 <lightlike> thanks glozow!
20:02 <darius14> thanks @glozow!!
20:02 <jnewbery> Thanks glozow!
20:02 <dulcedu> thanks so much Glowoz!
20:02 <glozow> jnewbery: who's next week? hehe
20:02 <svav> Thanks glozow
20:02 <kouloumos> thanks glozow!
20:02 <emzy> Thanks glozow!
20:02 <murch> darius14: The PR that jonatack linked 18418 is the one I was referring to
20:02 <biteskola> +1
20:03 <Zero-1729> Thanks glozow!
20:03 <dkf> thanks glozow, really like the link with all (!) the different coin sort algos
20:03 <b10c> Thanks!
{% endirc %}
