---
layout: pr
date: 2021-06-09
title: "Mempool/validation: mempool ancestor/descendant limits for packages"
pr: 21800
authors: [glozow]
components: ["mempool", "tests", "validation"]
host: glozow
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

* Apart from coinbase transactions, every Bitcoin transaction has at least one _parent_, another
  transaction whose outputs are spent as its inputs. We call the spending transaction the _child_.
_Ancestors_ include parents, their parents, and so forth. _Descendants_ include children, their
children, and so forth.

* Each mempool entry has information on its ancestors and descendants in the mempool. This speeds
  up some operations (i.e. selecting which transactions to include in a block and which to evict for
low feerates) and slows down others (adding and removing transactions).

* We have ancestor/descendant limits as part of our mempool policy with the goal of constraining the
  maximum computation needed for such operations. For example, if seeing a conflicting transaction
in a block could cause us to remove a transaction with 10,000 descendants in the mempool, our
mempool could become a sink of computational resources (which could also be triggered intentionally
by an attacker) rather than a useful cache of unconfirmed transactions.

* The current ancestor/descendant default limits are: no transaction can have more than 25
  or 101KvB of ancestors or descendants including itself. The mempool member function
[`CalculateMemPoolAncestors()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/346e52afd6d5e317c96fc506bb54cde13e87c8b2/src/txmempool.h#L682)
calculates and enforces limits for a transaction that is in or outside the mempool.

* [PR#21800](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/21800) defines and implements an
  ancestor/descendant limit for packages (groups of transactions being validated together for
submission to the mempool). The following figure illustrates some examples of why we cannot simply
check `CalculateMemPoolAncestors()` on the transactions individually.

	- In Scenario [A], calling `CalculateMemPoolAncestors()` on transaction A will show that it
	  is within limits (24 in-mempool ancestors). Calling `CalculateMemPoolAncestors()` on
transaction B will also show that it is within limits (0 in-mempool ancestors).

	- In Scenario [B], transaction A and B both have 13 in-mempool ancestors, but they're the
	  same transactions. If we naively added their ancestor counts together, we would be grossly
overestimating.

	- In Scenario [H], transaction C's ancestor limits are only exceeded when both transaction A
	  and B are considered together; it isn't sufficient to only try pair combinations or simply
subtract total package sizes from the limits.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your
review approach?

2. Why do we have ancestor/descendant limits in the mempool? Why do we use 25 transactions and 101K
virtual bytes as our limit?

	2a. Is it possible for a block to have a chain of 100 transactions (assuming all other
consensus rules are met)?

	2b. Imagine a "family" to be any group of transactions connected by parent-child
relationships, including descendants-of-ancestors (e.g. "siblings," two transactions sharing a
parent in the group) and ancestors-of-descendants (e.g. "co-parents", two transactions sharing a
child in the group). What is the largest possible family that can exist in the mempool, assuming the
default limits are applied? (Hint: it's not 25).

3. In our [package validation
code](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/346e52afd6d5e317c96fc506bb54cde13e87c8b2/src/validation.cpp#L1076-L1175),
we run `CalculateMemPoolAncestors()` on each transaction individually during `PreChecks()`. Why is
this insufficient?

4. What is the package ancestor/descendant policy proposed by this PR? What are your thoughts? Do
you have any alternative proposals?

5. How might we test this algorithm? What are some edge cases we might want to consider?

6. This PR turns the original `CalculateMemPoolAncestors()` operating on a `CTxMemPoolEntry` into a
wrapper function, constructing a vector from the singular entry. What could happen if the wrapper
function used a _copy_ of the entry instead of the entry itself? (Hint: what happens
[here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/346e52afd6d5e317c96fc506bb54cde13e87c8b2/src/txmempool.cpp#L174-L176)
if the precondition is not met?).

7. What is a
[`CTxMemPoolEntryRef`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/346e52afd6d5e317c96fc506bb54cde13e87c8b2/src/txmempool.h#L84)?
Why don't we just operate on a `std::vector<CTxMemPoolEntry>` instead?

<!-- TODO: After meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags ## Meeting Log

{% irc %} {% endirc %} -->
