---
layout: pr
date: 2022-02-23
title: "Use query parameters to control resource loading"
pr: 24098
authors: [stickies-v]
components: ["build system", "rpc/rest/zmq"]
host: stickies-v
status: past
commit: 6628e8f
---

## Notes

This PR is a followup to #17631, which we discussed in a [previous review club](/17631).

### PR description

In RESTful APIs, [typically](https://rapidapi.com/blog/api-glossary/parameters/query/) path
parameters  (e.g. `/some/unique/resource/`) are used to represent resources, and query parameters
(e.g. `?sort=asc`) are used to control how these resources are being loaded through e.g. sorting,
pagination, filtering, etc.

As first [discussed in #17631](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17631#discussion_r733031180),
the [current REST api](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/REST-interface.md)
contains two endpoints `/headers/` and `/blockfilterheaders/` that rather unexpectedly use path
parameters to control how many (filter) headers are returned in the response. While this is no
critical issue, it is unintuitive and we are still early enough to easily phase this behaviour out
and ensure new endpoints (if any) do not have to stick to non-standard behaviour just for internal
consistency.

In this PR, a new `HTTPRequest::GetQueryParameter` method is introduced to easily parse query
parameters, as well as two new `/headers/` and `/blockfilterheaders/` endpoints that use a count
query parameter are introduced. The old path parameter-based endpoints are kept without too much
overhead, but the documentation now points to the new query parameter-based endpoints as the default
interface to encourage standardness.

The `COUNT` parameter controls how many
[headers](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/pr24098/doc/REST-interface.md#blockheaders)
or
[blockfilterheaders](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/pr24098/doc/REST-interface.md#blockfilter-headers)
are returned for a single API request, and defaults to 5 if unspecified.

### Using the REST API

We'll test the [REST
API](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/pr24098/doc/REST-interface.md) on
signet. To do so, first start a bitcoind instance with the `-rest` flag enabled. To use the
`blockfilterheaders` endpoint, you'll also need to set `-blockfilterindex=1`: `./bitcoind -signet
-rest -blockfilterindex=1`

As soon as bitcoind is fully up and running, you should be able to query the API, for example by
using curl on the command line: `curl "127.0.0.1:38332/rest/chaininfo.json"` As a response, you
should get:
```
{"chain":"signet","blocks":78071,"headers":78071,"bestblockhash":"000000b3e98c0de440154f42819b56586ed36bad0baa2db8ba5d0950e416dcad","difficulty":0.002873067874458486,"time":1645188967,"mediantime":1645188099,"verificationprogress":0.9999934105995945,"initialblockdownload":false,"chainwork":"000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000dc187f6fa0","size_on_disk":373918704,"pruned":false,"softforks":{"bip34":{"type":"buried","active":true,"height":1},"bip66":{"type":"buried","active":true,"height":1},"bip65":{"type":"buried","active":true,"height":1},"csv":{"type":"buried","active":true,"height":1},"segwit":{"type":"buried","active":true,"height":1},"taproot":{"type":"bip9","bip9":{"status":"active","start_time":-1,"timeout":9223372036854775807,"since":0,"min_activation_height":0},"height":0,"active":true}},"warnings":"This is a pre-release test build - use at your own risk - do not use for mining or merchant applications"}
```

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. In HTTP requests, what is the difference between a `path` and a `query` parameter?

1. What are the **benefits** of changing the `COUNT` parameter from a `path` parameter to a `query`
   parameter?

1. What are the **drawbacks** of changing the `COUNT` parameter from a `path` parameter to a `query`
   parameter?

1. *(general discussion)* If the effort of implementing a change is already done, what could be some
   good reasons for rejecting an (unharmful) code change anyway? Do you (dis)agree with [this
comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24098#pullrequestreview-860377099)?

1. Does this PR change any of the existing function signatures? If so, why? Can this cause any
   behaviour change?

1. Can you list all the commits that introduce behaviour change(s)? Do you feel comfortable about
   these behaviour change(s)?

1. Consider the request (signet) `GET
   /rest/blockfilterheaders/basic/2/0000004c6aad0c89c1c060e8e116dcd849e0554935cd78ff9c6a398abeac6eda.json?count=1`.
   What would the response be prior to this PR? What would the response be after this PR? Which
   (modified) function is responsible for this behaviour change? Try reasoning about it before
   verifying experimentally.

1. One reviewer [raises](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24098#issuecomment-1027755825) the
   view that `/rest/headers/` is a collection endpoint instead of a single resource endpoint. Do you
   agree? If so, would you change the PR to implement this? What would be the drawbacks of doing that?

1. Why does this PR introduce both
   [HTTPRequest::GetQueryParameter](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/6628e8f3b0578ec09611c82011dd2e282ed42064/src/httpserver.h#L96)
   and
   [GetQueryParameterFromUri](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/6628e8f3b0578ec09611c82011dd2e282ed42064/src/httpserver.h#L142)?
   Couldn't we just put all the logic in `HTTPRequest::GetQueryParameter`?

1. Specifically with regards to the structure of the endpoints, do you see any further improvements
   that could be made?


## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00  <stickies-v> #startmeeting
17:00  <svav> Hi
17:00  <kouloumos> hi   
17:00  <theStack> hi!
17:00  <stickies-v> Welcome everyone! Today we're looking at #24098 (https://bitcoincore.reviews/24098) which aims to improve the endpoint logic of the REST API.
17:00  <glozow> hi!
17:00  <bitplebpaul> hi!
17:01  <bitcoin1o1> hi all
17:01  <jnewbery> hi!
17:01  <effexzi> Hi every1
17:01  <larryruane> hi
17:01  <michaelfolkson> hi
17:01  <OliverOffing> hi all!
17:01  <stickies-v> Lots of old timers I see - do we also have any first timers with us today?
17:01  <Dame> hello
17:01  <jaonoctus> hi
17:01  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> Hello!
17:02  <schmidty> hi
17:02  <galv> stickies-v I'm a first timer.
17:02  <sipa> hi
17:02  <svav> Can I ask the first timers how they heard of this review club?
17:02  <stickies-v> Welcome galv ! It's a very open format here so please feel free to engage in the discussion for as much as you like.
17:03  <glozow> welcome galv!
17:03  <svav> Welcome galv
17:03  <stickies-v> As you may have deduced from some of the later questions, there are still some open discussion topics in this PR. Please don't feel shy to chip in with your thoughts, it helps to know what the community consensus is.
17:03  <stickies-v> Who got the chance to read review the PR or read the notes? Can I get a quick y/n? If you tried, did you run into any issues running and testing the REST API?
17:03  <galv> I heard about it through someone at a local meetup in the bay area (not crypto-related, but effective altruism related) from someone who works on bitcoin futures contracts.
17:03  <willcl_ark> hi
17:04  <svav> OK cool thanks galv
17:04  <bitplebpaul> y, concept ack
17:04  <svav> I read the notes and had a look at the code
17:04  <theStack> y (read PR description and discussion, didn't look at the commits yet)
17:05  <svav> Was this PR done because people using the functionality were complaining that it was non-standard? Or did the developer just decide it would be better if updated?
17:05  <bitcoin1o1> y,  concept ack
17:05  <kouloumos> y, concept ack, further in the review than usual but still haven't look into the approach
17:05  <glozow> just read the notes, learned about parameter types
17:06  <OliverOffing> just read the notes and skimming through the code now
17:06  <stickies-v> svav I've not heard of any complaints. My main motivation to do it now is to minimize the overhaul needed if/when we have more endpoints in the future. It makes it easier for devs to start using the API the more standard it is.
17:06  <stickies-v> Easy one to get started, just to make sure everyone understands the concept of what we're changing here. In HTTP requests, what is the difference between a `path` and a `query` parameter?
17:07  <svav> A path parameter is part of the url and identifies where a resource is. They appear to the left of the ?
17:07  <svav> A query parameter appears to the right of the ? and controls how the resource is queried, e.g. controls sorting or filtering.
17:07  <svav> Can anyone give typical usage of the REST functionality? Who is using it and what for?
17:08  <michaelfolkson> Do you use REST over JSON-RPC stickies-v?
17:08  <stickies-v> svav very good, although to be pedantic the `query string` appears to the right of the `?`, and the `query string` can consist of multiple `query parameters` separated by an `&`
17:09  <jaonoctus> The query parameters are used to sort/filter resources. On the other hand, path parameters are used to identify a specific resource or resources.
17:09  <jaonoctus> e.g. /users?sort=asc&name=Joao (where /users is the recource and the rest are the query params)
17:10  <OliverOffing> A URL/URI is composed of different parts: <protocol>:<domain>/<path>?<query>, e.g. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin?page=5. The path is generally used to represent objects/resources whereas the query usually represent filters or arguments that shape which of those objects are returned, in which order, and containing which fields
17:10  <larryruane> and this is a worldwide convention, so we're just trying to have a more standard interface
17:10  <stickies-v> michaelfolkson I'm not sure if I understand your question 100% right, but REST and RPC are different paradigms on how to organize your API, they don't strictly specify the communication protocol. REST is almost always done over HTTP(S), but this is not required
17:11  <larryruane> if you start the node with `-rest`, the interface is available only locally? Or available to anyone who can reach the IP addr and port?
17:11  <stickies-v> jaonoctus OliverOffing exactly!
17:12  <stickies-v> larryruane I suppose this depends on your networking settings?
17:12  <stickies-v> Just a few things to add to what's already been answered:
17:12  <stickies-v> Well actually just one haha, everything else is covered already, but path parameters are positional, query parameter are key-val structures
17:12  <stickies-v> (this becomes important later)
17:13  <bitplebpaul> <> /users?sort=asc&name=Joao  <> would give all users named Joao, in ascending order?
17:14  <stickies-v> bitplebpaul well each API is free to implement its logic however it wants to, but that sounds like what you'd expect (assuming a GET request to this endpoint). This is a collection endpoint.
17:14  <stickies-v> I'll move on to the next question already, but in general - always feel free to continue the discussion on previous questions/topics
17:14  <stickies-v> What are the [benefits/drawbacks] of changing the `COUNT` parameter from a `path` parameter to a `query` parameter?
17:15  <bitplebpaul> benefit -> standardization with the rest of the web & RESTful practices
17:15  <willcl_ark> are paths also required, but queries are optional?
17:15  <theStack> obvious benefit: following best practices
17:15  <svav> The COUNT parameter is best described as a query parameter, and therefore the intuitive and conventional implementation would be to have it as a query parameter.
17:15  <bitplebpaul> drawbacks: none? since we are only deprecating and not eliminating the old way.
17:16  <OliverOffing> Benefits: "standardized", least developer confusion, more organized
17:16  <OliverOffing> Drawbacks: need to change code, need maintain two routes to keep backwards compatibility (for a while)
17:16  <stickies-v> bitplebpaul theStack yes exactly, and this is also the main benefit for the current endpoints. There are additional general functional advantages that we can benefit from in the future too, though
17:17  <stickies-v> willcl_ark path parameters are indeed required, unless of course you construct multiple endpoints where some path parameters are omitted, but this can become really confusing both for users and for developers as there will often be ambiguity
17:17  <svav> Do we know how much the REST interface is being used at the moment? And for what purposes?
17:17  <stickies-v> OliverOffing that's indeed the only and main drawback I see (cc bitplebpaul - dev burden is always something to consider)
17:19  <svav> For my understanding, are the headers we are referring to Version, Previous Block Hash, Merkle Root, Timestamp, Difficulty Target and Nonce? So e.g. a COUNT of 2, would return the first two of these?
17:20  <stickies-v> svav to my knowledge there is no data collection whatsoever, including on usage, so this is difficult to answer. My gut feeling says it's much less used than the RPC, also because it's unauthenticated and only contains a subset of the functionality. Main purpose over RPC is that it's much easier to use (less overhead), so if you don't need any of the RPC endpoints REST is probably the best choice. Also in general
17:20  <stickies-v>  there's a ton more generic tooling available for REST that can make your life much easier.
17:21  <larryruane> svav: "... REST interface is being used..." I thinkthere are general-purpose monitoring mechanisms like Grafana that can easily be plugged into a REST interface, while it would take more work (if even possible) to use the RPC interface
17:22  <stickies-v> and also really cool tooling like OpenAPI, if we ever decide to start using that - which is probably a bit of a pipe dream of mine haha
17:23  <stickies-v> Alright let's dive into the code. Does this PR change any of the existing function signatures? If so, why? Can this cause any behaviour change?
17:23  <theStack> i guess the REST api is potentially useful for browser client-side stuff, e.g. javascript?
17:24  <svav> What is meant by a "function signature"?
17:25  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> I think I'm seeing some function signatures changed in tests so far
17:25  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> svav I believe its if the arguments to a function change
17:25  <larryruane> there is the scripted-diff rename, maybe that counts as a function signature change?
17:25  <stickies-v> theStack in general, it's much less overhead to interface with a HTTP JSON REST API because requests and (de)serialization are super straightforward. Imo, if the REST API has the endpoints you need for your purpose, pretty much any (programmatic) use should be easier instead of RPC I think.
17:26  <kouloumos> does ParseDataFormat becoming non-static counts as such change?
17:26  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> Yea I remember that from a previous review, RPC seriealizes and has more overhead
17:26  <theStack> stickies-v: thanks, that makes sense!
17:27  <stickies-v> larryruane from my understanding function and parameter names are not part of the function signature?
17:28  <stickies-v> kouloumos on the money! And do you think that can cause any behaviour change?
17:28  <larryruane> stickies-v: "...should be easier instead of RPC..." But isn't the REST interface more restrictive? You can't for example `sendmany` using it, right? I thought REST was in effect readonly
17:28  <stickies-v> larryruane exactly, which is why I disclaimed it with "if the REST API has the endpoints you need for your purpose"
17:29  <kouloumos> I think not, but I am still sharpening my C++
17:30  <stickies-v> svav this doesn't seem to be an official source, but from quick glance this gives some more understanding on function signature: https://www.cs.unm.edu/~storm/C++/ProgrammingTerms/FunctionSignatures.html
17:30  <larryruane> stickies-v: ah right, got it +1
17:30  <stickies-v> anyone got any ideas on the behaviour change of ParseDataFormat becoming non-static?
17:32  <stickies-v> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24098/commits/833803e9aa4a107d9b48d0fb51b360b1b3df3b21#diff-590507deaf686d6571f73979df5f3c6da6013a13e597f390b8facce39f7c69d1R135-R136
17:32  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> I only see it being added and not changed
17:32  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> derp
17:32  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> I dont think it would
17:32  <larryruane> Not sure if this counts as a behavior change, but when a function is `static`, it can be inlined, but otherwise it can't (unless it's implemented in a header file)
17:33  <sipa> it becoming non-static just means no function with the same name can occur in other compilation units
17:33  <sipa> larryruane: It can still be inlined, but not inlined _away_.
17:33  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> but that is a legit function signature change correct
17:34  <stickies-v> Kaizen_Kintsugi_ I'm actually not 100% sure but I did consider that a signature change yes haha, if not hope someone can correct me
17:35  <stickies-v> the reason ParseDataFormat had to become static is so it became accessible in the unit test in rest_tests.cpp
17:35  <stickies-v> *non-static sorry
17:35  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> ah
17:35  <kouloumos> If it's static is only visible to functions in the same file right? so I understand that you did that to be able to use that function in test/rest_test.cpp
17:36  <stickies-v> kouloumos technically it's only visible within the same translation unit, which in practice should mean same file but I think there are exceptions
17:36  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> ah i did not know that static did that
17:36  <stickies-v> I'm glad to see no one confused the staticness of member functions with non-member functions, hoorah!
17:37  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> from the reference "static -- this function can only be seen in this file?  No, this means that this function can be called without an instantiated object, as normally member functions (methods) must be called using an instantiation of the class, though with this keyword, you don't need it."
17:37  <larryruane> and confusingly, a static method within a class means something different, it means you don't need an instance of that object to call the method
17:37  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> I see I see
17:37  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> that is confusing
17:37  <larryruane> keyword overloading :)
17:37  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> srs
17:37  <stickies-v> Behaviour change is always something to be extra careful with. Can you list all the commits that introduce behaviour change(s)? Do you feel comfortable about these behaviour change(s)?
17:38  <bitplebpaul> @larry
17:38  <bitplebpaul> woops
17:38  <larryruane> definitely commit 4 is the main one, also commit 2 reinstates the backwards compatibility?
17:39  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> 5?
17:39  <larryruane> (depending on how you count :) i mean as git log shows it)
17:39  <stickies-v> larryruane 0-indexed? :D
17:40  <larryruane> ah sorry, 1-indexed
17:41  <larryruane> (commit 4 = 833803, commit 2 = 395f78)
17:42  <stickies-v> larryruane yes exactly those two introduce behaviour change, even though those should be commits 3 and 5 so Kaizen_Kintsugi_ yes you're also right on 5
17:43  <stickies-v> but have a closer look at 833803e9a Handle query string when parsing data format - it modifies ParseDataFormat to return `param` without the query string, so effectively this changes how the API responds. Even though previously we weren't *expecting* people to add query parameters, they still could
17:44  <stickies-v> Alright we've already partly covered the next question, but just to see if anyone has issues running/testing this I'll quickly cover it anyway
17:44  <stickies-v> Consider the request (signet) `GET /rest/blockfilterheaders/basic/2/0000004c6aad0c89c1c060e8e116dcd849e0554935cd78ff9c6a398abeac6eda.json?count=1`. What would the response be prior to this PR? What would the response be after this PR? Which (modified) function is responsible for this behaviour change? Try reasoning about it before verifying experimentally.
17:45  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> The count parameter of 1 is ignored and the count of 2 is taken after basic?
17:46  <stickies-v> Kaizen_Kintsugi_ correct, we first check for path length, and only look at the query parameter if the path parameter is missing, as you can see in https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24098/files#diff-590507deaf686d6571f73979df5f3c6da6013a13e597f390b8facce39f7c69d1R369-R379
17:47  <bitplebpaul> and post PR the query parameter takes precedence?
17:47  <stickies-v> Well, we skipped part of the question. Let's address that first. "What would the response be prior to this PR?"
17:49  <svav> Prior, returns 2 headers of type basic.
17:49  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> Well I dont think it handled the splitting of the ?, so I think you would just get back nonesense
17:50  <bitplebpaul> +1 kaizen
17:50  <kouloumos> +1 svav
17:52  <larryruane> without the PR, it ignores the query string (`count=1`)
17:52  <stickies-v> Kaizen_Kintsugi_ yes! Prior, the ParseDataFormat would consider the query string as part of the format suffix (.json?count=5), which is an unrecognized. Moreover, it would try to look up the blockhash suffixed with the formatt suffix and query parameter (<somehash>.json?count=5), which of course doesn't exist, so the API would return
17:52  <stickies-v> `Invalid hash: 0000004c6aad0c89c1c060e8e116dcd849e0554935cd78ff9c6a398abeac6eda.json?count=1`
17:53  <svav> OK I see
17:53  <stickies-v> svav larryruane nope, prior to this PR the API does not handle the query string at all, it is just considered as part of the path, so it would fail most requests
17:55  <stickies-v> One reviewer raises (https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24098#issuecomment-1027755825) the view that `/rest/headers/` is a collection endpoint instead of a single resource endpoint. Do you agree? If so, would you change the PR to implement this? What would be the drawbacks of doing that?
17:55  <larryruane> oh i see, right, that's why this is not quite a completely backwards-compatible change
17:56  <stickies-v> larryruane exactly - but as I've described in the Behaviour Change section of the PR, I can't anticipate any situations where this would be undesirable or unexpected, until someone proves me wrong...
17:56  <bitplebpaul> 3 questions, 3 minutes, we got this.
17:57  <stickies-v> glozow is making hosts do push ups for every missed question, help me out guys...
17:57  <glozow> 😂
17:59  <bitplebpaul> I'm not sure
17:59  <bitplebpaul> I don't have a bitcoind to play/test with right now
18:00  <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> damn I dont know the difference between collection and single resource
18:00  <stickies-v> Kaizen_Kintsugi_ well basically you could e.g. query GET /users/ to get all users, and that would be a collection endpoint. When querying GET /users/5/, you would be querying a single resource and expect to get details on user 5
18:00  <bitplebpaul> I think the difference between collection and single resource just refers to GETting a single block or a collection of blocks
18:01  <bitplebpaul> yeah, +1 stickies
18:01  <stickies-v> Alright unfortunately we're out of time though, if anyone has any further questions or comments I'm always happy to engage!
18:01  <stickies-v> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
