---
layout: pr
date: 2022-05-11
title: "[kernel 2a/n] Split hashing/index `GetUTXOStats` codepaths, decouple from `coinstatsindex`"
pr: 24410
authors: [dongcarl]
components: ["utxo db and indexes"]
host: dongcarl
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

- The `gettxoutsetsetinfo` RPC uses the `GetUTXOStats` function which calculates statistics about the UTXO set. These statistics include the the total number of transactions, the total amount (in bitcoins) of all outputs, etc.
- A Coinstats Index was added in [#19521](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19521) that dramatically sped up the `gettxoutsetinfo` RPC as it retains UTXO statistics calculation results for every block. The Coinstats Index also allows for querying UTXO statistics for a particular block instead of just current tip.
- [The libbitcoinkernel project](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/24303) is an effort to decouple Bitcoin Core’s consensus engine from other non-consensus modules (such as the various indices) in the codebase.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
2. On a conceptual level, which modules in Bitcoin Core likely belong in `libbitcoinkernel` and which ones don't?
3. Where in the Bitcoin Core codebase can you see `libbitcoinkernel`'s entanglement with index? (There might be multiple places)
4. What is the `CCoinsStats` struct, and how is it used in `GetUTXOStats`?
5. Please describe how `GetUTXOStats` is called in [`ChainstateManager::PopulateAndValidateSnapshot`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/12455acca2c3adf5c88ae9c1a02a7c192fe0f53b/src/validation.cpp#L4970) and what codepath(s) it takes when called in this way.
6. Please describe how `GetUTXOStats` is called for the [`gettxoutsetinfo`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/194b414697777b5ac9d9918004b851dbd4f8ce17/src/rpc/blockchain.cpp#L811) RPC and what codepath(s) it takes when called in this way.
7. After this PR is merged, what would happen if a contributor re-introduced a dependency from validation to the Coinstats Index?


<!-- TODO: After meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags
## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
{% endirc %}
-->
