---
layout: pr
date: 2022-07-27
title: "incorrect blk file size calculation during reindex results in recoverable blk file corruption"
pr: 24858
authors: [mruddy]
components: ["block storage"]
host: LarryRuane
status: past
commit: bcb0cac
---

## Notes

- During [Initial block download (IBD)](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/106136/97099),
a new node automatically initializes and populates its data directory by fetching blocks from peers,
validating them, and storing them in the `blocks` directory within the data directory (default
`$HOME/.bitcoin`).

- The blocks are stored in files named `blknnnnn.dat` (for example, `blk01234.dat`).
These files are limited to 128 MiB, so each can hold about 60 blocks or
more depending on their sizes.

- The `blknnnnn.dat` files are in a custom format: a sequence of blocks, each preceded by a 4-byte
  "marker" or "magic number" and a 4-byte integer indicating the block's size or length in bytes.
The blocks need not be in height-order, either within a block file, or across block files.  For
example, block 2000 could be stored in `blk00010.dat` while block 1500 could be stored in
`blk00011.dat`.

- In order to save disk space, the node operator can enable
[pruning](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/37496/how-can-i-run-bitcoind-in-pruning-mode)
using `-prune`, so the node retains only the most recent few hundred blocks on disk, although IBD
still downloads and verifies all blocks since the beginning.

- During IBD, besides storing the raw blocks, several kinds of state are derived from
the blocks and also stored the data directory as entries in LevelDB. The two most prominent are
the block index and the chainstate (UTXO set). The
[block index](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/5057adf22fc4c3593e1e633defeda96be508f198/src/chain.h#L150),
contains an entry for every block (including pruned ones) and indexes the
locations (file and offset within the file) of unpruned raw blocks.

- If corruption is suspected in the derived indices (the block index or
chainstate), the user has the option of starting over with an empty data directory
and performing IBD again, but that's slow and uses a lot of network bandwidth.
If the node isn't pruned, an alternative is to start the node with the `-reindex` option.
This will use the existing blocks files to rebuild all the derived state.
This is simliar to IBD but obtains blocks from local files instead of network peers.

- [PR #24858](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24858) fixes a long-standing bug that can
  cause a form of mild corruption in the way blocks are stored within the blocks files following a
reindex.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. Which parts of the `bitcoind` data directory are not derived from other parts of
the data directory? What are some examples of parts that are?
<!-- blocks files are not derived, block index, txindex, chainstate are. -->

1. Why are blocks in the block files disordered?
<!-- Headers-first download https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/59933/97099
Blocks are stored in the order received (appending to one of the blocks files).
Since block download is parallelized (across peers), blocks can arrive out of order,
and hence stored on disk out of order -->

1. What is [`CBlockFileInfo`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/a4e066af8573dcefb11dff120e1c09e8cf7f40c2/src/chain.h#L43) used for?
<!-- It maintains information about one blocks file. -->

1. What is reindexing, and how does it differ from IBD (initial block download)?
<!-- Reindexing sources blocks from local files, IBD sources from peers. -->

1. How does pruning interact with reindexing?
<!-- Reindexing isn't possible if pruning is enabled -->

1. What is the format of the `blknnnnn.dat` files?
Are these files portable across CPU architectures (big-endian, little-endian)?
<!-- Magic, length, block, ... -- yes, they are portable -->

1. What happens if a blocks file becomes corrupted?
Partial hint: See
[this call](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/5057adf22fc4c3593e1e633defeda96be508f198/src/validation.cpp#L4281)
to [`FindByte`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6dc3084eec912cf2abfe18d1c05655defaa45e20/src/streams.h#L726)
<!-- `LoadExternalBlockFile` recovers from the corruption by scanning forward
in the blocks file until it reaches the start of a block -->

1. Each network type (mainnet, testnet, signet, regtest) has its own "magic" bytes, for example,
[mainnet](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/623745ca74cf3f54b474dac106f5802b7929503f/src/chainparams.cpp#L102)).
Where else are these bytes used? Why do they differ across network types?
<!-- Used for network messages. Their purpose is to ensure that (for example) testnet
blocks files are not accidentally interpreted as mainnet blocks files. -->

1. What's the purpose of [the loop in `FindBlockPos()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/node/blockstorage.cpp#L593)?
<!-- Find a blocks file with sufficient space to add this block. -->

1. What bug does this PR purport to fix? Do you think it fixes it?

1. Did you [reproduce the problem](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24858#pullrequestreview-944897633) that this PR fixes?

1. A [review comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24858#discussion_r895769516)
suggested a slightly different way to fix the bug. Explain the
alternate approach. How does it compare?

1. (Bonus question) The definition of [BLOCK_SERIALIZATION_HEADER_SIZE](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24858/files#diff-ed3f90693a242b38b9719af171de8f55183576957676dfa358945bea22276bd5R48)
must be the same across platforms (so that the blocks files are portable).
Why is it okay to assume an `int` is 4 bytes? Couldn't it be different on some platforms?

<!-- See https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/623745ca74cf3f54b474dac106f5802b7929503f/src/compat/assumptions.h#L43 -->

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <larryruane> #startmeeting
17:00 <josie[m]> hi
17:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 <larryruane> Hi everyone! today we'll review PR 24858, notes are here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/24858
17:01 <Amirreza> Hi
17:01 <BlueMoon> Hello!
17:02 <hernanmarino_> Hello everyone 
17:02 <pablo_martin> Hello!
17:02 <Lov3r_Of_Bitcoin> hello
17:02 <rewe> Hi I'm new here
17:03 <brunoerg> hi!!
17:03 <brunoerg> rewe: welcome! 
17:03 <larryruane> Is anyone here for the first time? Please feel free to say hi! Welcome, rewe !
17:03 <pablo_martin> yes, first time here... hi all!
17:04 <hernanmarino_> Welcome Pablo !
17:04 <glozow> hi
17:04 <rebroad> first time here also
17:04 <adam2k> 👋 hello
17:04 <larryruane> Welcome, Pablo! And rebroad!
17:05 <rebroad> there's a PR I wanted to ask about - to try to find out why it's not being given any attention
17:05 <larryruane> I'm having network trouble, Gloria, could you be host for a minute or 2?
17:06 <glozow> sure
17:06 <glozow> Did you all get a chance to review the PR or look at the notes? how about a y/n
17:06 <BlueMoon> I read a bit, it's interesting.
17:06 <brunoerg> y for the notes
17:07 <pablo_martin> yes glozow
17:07 <schmidty_> hola
17:07 <larryruane> glozow: (i'm back, thank you!)
17:07 <josie[m]> y - went through the PR and also read the notes
17:07 <glozow> Great! could any of you summarize what this PR is doing?
17:07 <hernanmarino_> notes n , tested the fix y 
17:08 <adam2k> y
17:09 <michaelfolkson> Did you reproduce the issue hernanmarino_?
17:09 <hernanmarino_> michaelfolkson: yes
17:09 <michaelfolkson> Cool
17:09 <josie[m]> this PR is fixes a bug where extra bytes are added to a serialized during reindexing. the extra bytes cause an error to  be printed to the log when it is later de-serialized 
17:09 <BlueMoon> It deals with the files where the block information is stored, how the size calculation is incorrect.
17:10 <adam2k> There is a deserialization error in the log file that appears when doing a reindexing of the blknnnn.dat files.  It's not fatal, but it's confusing and possibly alarming for people that see the issue in their logs.
17:10 <josie[m]> s/serialized/serialized block/
17:10 <larryruane> josie[m]: adam2k: BlueMoon: yes!
17:11 <BlueMoon> :)
17:11 <larryruane> Before we get into the questions, does anyone have any questions about the Notes? Anything unclear (or wrong)?
17:12 <michaelfolkson> Maybe this should be asked later but you can explain "A reindex, if it occurs, always happens immediately after the node starts up, before any blocks have been added from peers."?
17:12 <josie[m]> one thing that was a little unclear to me: the first few questions in the notes didn't seem directly related to the PR (tho helpful background knowledge to have)
17:12 <michaelfolkson> Why?
17:14 <larryruane> michaelfolkson: Reindex is requested by the user (node operator) as a configuration option (command line or in the config file, tho you probably would never put it in the file, or else it would reindex on every startup!),
17:15 <larryruane> and if specified (`-reindex` or `-reindex=1`), it will happen when the node first starts up ... after that process completes (which takes hours usually), then the node syncs with its peers, and you'll add more blocks as usual
17:16 <larryruane> josie[m]: yes, that's my fault, I thought it would be helpful to make sure people had the background needed before jumping into this particular PR
17:16 <Amirreza> A question. Notes say that blk???.dat files are 128 MiG but store 60 or more blocks. Why 60? I imagined the number is much higher while block size are at most 1 MiG.
17:17 <larryruane> Amirreza: well actually, since the segwit upgrade, blocks are almost always larger than 1 MiB .. they're often close to 2
17:17 <hernanmarino_> amirezza : that 's not the case really
17:18 <BlueMoon> I find this information on IBD very interesting. https://btctranscripts.com/andreas-antonopoulos/2018-10-23-andreas-antonopoulos-initial-blockchain-download/
17:18 <michaelfolkson> Yeah the SegWit block size -> block weight https://jimmysong.medium.com/understanding-segwit-block-size-fd901b87c9d4
17:18 <Amirreza> larryruane: Thanks, I should read more about segwit.
17:20 <larryruane> Thanks, BlueMoon: and michaelfolkson: - very useful links! Okay, here's question 2 (but feel free to bring up what we've already covered): Which parts of the bitcoind data directory are not derived from other parts of the data directory? What are some examples of parts that are?
17:20 <larryruane> (I should have said, "... that are part of the data directory")
17:22 <michaelfolkson> There are things not related to this PR. Like banlist.dat and peers.dat
17:23 <michaelfolkson> peers.dat must be updated from banlist.dat (is that what you mean by "derived")?
17:24 <hernanmarino_> Regarding this PR , the index is derived from the blocks
17:25 <larryruane> michaelfolkson: that's really good, I actually hadn't thought of P2P! I was thinking more that the `blocks` directory is not derived from other stuff in the datadir, but like ... yes, as hernanmarino_: said, exactly
17:25 <larryruane> the block index is derived from the blocks files ... also the chainstate, which is the UTXO set
17:28 <larryruane> Things in the data directory that are derived are, in a way, to make performance reasonable ... if the node is looking for information about a block (and has its hash), it would be impractical to linearly search the blocks files (blknnnn.dat)! 
17:28 <michaelfolkson> For the new people the data directory: https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Data_directory
17:28 <BlueMoon> Thanks!!
17:29 <larryruane> michaelfolkson: +1 thanks! Okay how about question 3: "Why are blocks in the block files disordered?"
17:30 <adam2k> The blocks are added as they come in through the network, so there is no guarantee on order.
17:30 <BlueMoon> It's not necessary from what I've read, and each of these block files has a marker indicating the size of the block file, I imagine they are accessed via an index.
17:32 <josie[m]> the blk*.dat files have orphan blocks as well, which means we wouldn't expect a strict ordering
17:32 <michaelfolkson> "It is perfectly possible that *.blk files contains gaps of zeroes, or even partially written blocks" https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/49615/how-can-you-tell-if-youre-at-the-end-of-an-incomplete-blk-dat-file
17:32 <larryruane> adam2k: yes exactly, a long time ago, the blocks were ordered, but initial block download (IBD) got a major performance improvement by a feature called headers-first download
17:33 <blocknum256> The order of the blocks in the block files is set by the order you get them from peers during the IBD
17:34 <larryruane> So the node first downloads only headers (which are only 80 bytes each), figures out the best chain (assuming the blocks turn out to be valid), knows order of the blocks, so can request many blocks simultaneously from different peers ... and their reply times are kind of random .. so the blocks end up out of order
17:34 <larryruane> blocknum256: yes
17:35 <larryruane> (again, feel free to keep discussing, even if I go on...) Question 4: "What is CBlockFileInfo used for?"
17:36 <nassersaazi> larryruane: just for clarity....does that mean the headers are ordered?
17:37 <BlueMoon> Used to get information about the last block of files; blocks, size, heights, time....
17:37 <adam2k> CBlockFileInfo is a class that manages information about what is contained within the block files.  Things like the number of blocks.
17:37 <josie[m]> CBlockFileInfo contains metadata about a block file, min and max block height in the file, timestamps, size, etc
17:38 <michaelfolkson> That's what it contains but what is it used for? :) (I'm still looking)
17:39 <larryruane> nassersaazi: Yes the headers come in ordered by height, and there are many in a single message (getheaders P2P message) .. so the node basically says "I know about block hash X, give me up to N headers that build on block X"
17:40 <larryruane> josie[m]: yes, there's one of those for each `blknnnn.dat` file ... are they persisted to disk?
17:41 <adam2k> it looks like that class is used in several places, like within the blockstorage.cpp there are methods like LoadBlockIndexDB and WriteBlockIndexDB.
17:41 <BlueMoon> CBlockFileInfo is used to obtain the block file information entry for a block file.
17:42 <larryruane> adam2k: yes exactly, they're written out to LevelDB, part of the "block index" ... BlueMoon: yes!
17:42 <BlueMoon> :)
17:42 <josie[m]> larryruane: hm, not sure about on disk.. tho it does have a serialize method that looks like it outputs json 
17:44 <josie[m]> does levelDB write to disk? i thought it was an in memory db 
17:44 <larryruane> josie[m]: I don't think it's json .. but yes, anytime you see those serialization methods, you know this data structure is getting saved to (and read from) disk or sent over (and received from) the network
17:44 <larryruane> josie[m]: it's both, it caches in memory but also persists to disk
17:44 <josie[m]> larryruane: cool, TIL!
17:45 <larryruane> so if you look in datadir/blocks/index you'll see those *.ldb files, those are leveldb
17:46 <larryruane> ok let's see.. question 5 "What is reindexing, and how does it differ from IBD (initial block download)?"
17:48 <adam2k> According to the help cmd "Rebuild chain state and block index from the blk*.dat files on disk. This will also rebuild active optional indexes."
17:49 <michaelfolkson> It is almost like restarting IBD but with blocks you already have stored
17:49 <adam2k> Does that mean it does not re-download the blockchain from the network and use your local file storage instead?
17:49 <larryruane> yes, good, reindexing sources blocks from local files, IBD sources blocks from peers
17:49 <blocknum256> It rebuilds the index of blocks based on the blk*. dat files saved in . bitcoin/blocks
17:50 <larryruane> adam2k: yes, so depending on your network speed, reindex could be quite a bit faster than IBD
17:50 <hernanmarino_> adam2k: yes
17:50 <larryruane> question 6: How does pruning interact with reindexing?
17:51 <josie[m]> +1 to other answers, but in how it's different from IBD, reindexing does not verify the blocks, right? its assumed the blk files on disk have already been verified? 
17:51 <larryruane> (sorry I'm rushing a little, trying to have time to discuss the PR)
17:51 <michaelfolkson> If the reindex fails (multiple times) you'd have to instruct it to start IBD afresh. It wouldn't do it automatically?
17:51 <adam2k> I was looking at this earlier.  I have a pruned client and it appears that I don't have blknnnn.dat files that go beyond the memory limit that I set.
17:51 <larryruane> josie[m]: I'm pretty sure it does verify the blocks
17:52 <josie[m]> larryruane: ah, that makes sense, because in the case of a pruned client it is requesting those blocks from peers? 
17:52 <adam2k> So I'm assuming when I reindex with a pruned node I would need to do a partial IBD up until the point where I have the blknnnn.dat files?
17:52 <larryruane> michaelfolkson: I think reindexing does as much as it can (using the blk files), and then the node goes into its usual "sync with my peers" .. which may amount to IBD
17:52 <blocknum256> Q6: Since pruning raws block data for blocks older than a givven height, I think indexes are broke at that point
17:53 <josie[m]> adam2k: i think that's correct, but im guessing you wouldnt store blk files on disk in the case of a pruned node, you would just use the blocks to build the index? 
17:53 <larryruane> adam2k: The reindex request (`-reindex` on the command line) would actually fail if the node is pruned
17:54 <michaelfolkson> larryruane: I'd guess the optimal behavior would be to after multiple corruptions or whatever just drop all blocks and start afresh without input from user
17:54 <michaelfolkson> Don't think it does that though
17:54 <michaelfolkson> I think the user would have to decide that
17:55 <adam2k> hmm...ok, maybe I don't have something configured correctly because I can see the blknnnn.dat files on disc and it seems like I can reindex without any failures.
17:55 <larryruane> michaelfolkson: Yes it does do that, or very close.. like say reindex is able to process the first 100,000 blocks and then ran into some kind of corruption ... it will automatically IBD starting at 100,001
17:56 <larryruane> adam2k: is your node pruned?
17:57 <adam2k> I know this is off topic, but in my bitcoin.conf I set `prune=10204` isn't that all that I need to do in order to prune?
17:57 <michaelfolkson> larryruane: So it detects when the corruption happened and drops blocks from the corruption onwards and requests them from peers? That's neat if so
17:57 <larryruane> yes, and you're able to `-reindex`? I'll have to try that!
17:58 <josie[m]> larryruane, adam2k: im pretty sure you can run reindex on a pruned node. i just tried by adding prune=1000 in bitcoin.conf and then restarted bitcoind with -reindex 
17:58 <adam2k> yeah, I'm trying now and it appears to work.  I have to run a pruned node because I only have 512GB of disc space total.
17:58 <larryruane> ok that's cool, I didn't know that! I wonder how that works?
17:59 <larryruane> Okay we're about out of time, any comments on the bug that the PR fixes, or how the PR fixes it?
17:59 <josie[m]> i think it behaves the same as IBD (again, TIL), but it deletes older blocks as normal once you hit the pruned size. but yeah, i also need to play with this a bit more
17:59 <larryruane> (feel free to stay on to continue to discuss, I'll stay for a while)
17:59 <BlueMoon> No comment, thank you very much for so much valuable information. :)
18:00 <michaelfolkson> Erm bug should definitely be fixed :)
18:00 <blocknum256> larryruane: Thank you for your time!
18:00 <josie[m]> thanks for hosting larryruane! this seemed like a very small change at first, but the discussion on the PR was really interesting 
18:00 <Lov3r_Of_Bitcoin> thank you
18:00 <hernanmarino_> Thanks Larry 
18:01 <svav> Thanks larryruane
18:01 <larryruane> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
