---
layout: pr
date: 2022-04-20
title: "bug fix: update for ancestor inclusion using modified fees, not base"
pr: 24538
authors: [glozow]
components: ["mining"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit:
---

## Notes

-  Miners can retrieve a *block template*, a consensus-valid block excluding the proof of work
   (usually computed on separate, dedicated hardware) using the `getblocktemplate` RPC. The "miner"
([`BlockAssembler`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.h#L128))
generates this template using transactions from the mempool, attempting to maximize the fees in the
block while staying within the block weight and sigop limits.

- Miners can also use the `prioritisetransaction` RPC to artificially raise or lower the fees of
  specific transactions in their own mempools. The prioritisation is achieved through a
[fee delta](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/txmempool.h#L104).
The "modified fee" of a transaction is the sum of its base fee (total output value subtracted from
total input value) and the fee delta.

- [PR #7594](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7594) added ancestor package tracking to the
  mempool. The mempool caches every transaction's *ancestor feerate* (total modified fees divided by
total virtual size of the transaction and all of the transactions it depends upon to be mined).

- [PR #7600](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7600) changed the mining algorithm to use
  ancestor packages rather than individual transactions, which improves assessments of the incentive
compatibility of transactions and enables Child Pays for Parent (CPFP) fee-bumping.

	- The algorithm adds transactions from the mempool in *ancestor feerate* order; every time
	  it adds a transaction to the block template, it also adds each of its ancestors and
	  updates the remaining transactions in the mempool accordingly.

	- Rather than edit the mempool transactions itself, the miner creates a copy of the updated
	  entries in [`mapModifiedTx`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L309).

	- Review on [#24364](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24364) unearthed some
	  unexpected behavior in the way these entries are edited.

	- [PR #24538](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24538) fixes this unexpected behavior
	  and adds unit tests for mining prioritised transactions.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
How did you review the PR - did you try reproducing the bug?

2. What does ancestor feerate include?

3. In your own words, how does the mining algorithm work (Hint: the main logic can be found in
[`addPackageTxs()`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L303))?

	3a. In what scenario does a transaction get added to `mapModifiedTx`?

	3b. In what scenario does an entry in `mapModifiedTx` get further modified?

4. What is the bug fixed by this PR? Can you construct a specific case in which the bug leads to a
lower-fee transaction being included in the mempool? (Hint: the PR adds a test).

(Bonus Mining Questions)

1. Why is
   [`MAX_CONSECUTIVE_FAILURES`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L323)
necessary?

2. Could the `prioritisetransaction` RPC (and fee deltas) be replaced with parameters to
`getblocktemplate` to force-include or force-exclude transactions?

3. What two indexes can the
   [`indexed_modified_transaction_set`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.h#L108)
be sorted by?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <glozow> hi there!
17:00 <stickies-v> hi
17:00 <svav> Hi
17:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR Review Club!
17:00 <lightlike> hi
17:00 <emzy> Hi
17:00 <theStack> hi
17:00 <glozow> We're reviewing a miner bug fix today, "update for ancestor inclusion using modified fees, not base"
17:01 <glozow> Notes: https://bitcoincore.reviews/24538
17:01 <larryruane> hi
17:01 <glozow> Any first-timers?
17:01 <Dweezahr> yeah first time for me
17:01 <glozow> welcome Dweezahr!
17:02 <Dweezahr> Thank you
17:02 <glozow> This is our first time looking at the mining code in pr review club (afaik), so hopefully there's something new to learn for everyone
17:02 <svav> Dweezahr where did you hear about this meeting, if you don't mind sharing?
17:02 <glozow> Did y'all get a chance to review the PR or look at the notes? y/n
17:02 <Dweezahr> svav, I found it through the CONTRIBUTING file in the root of bitcoin/bitcoin on github
17:02 <effexzi> Hi every1 
17:03 <lightlike> i read the PR title as "minor bug fix" and thought "how modest!"
17:03 <svav> Ok thanks Dweezahr, and welcome!
17:03 <Dweezahr> I merged the PR into a local git repo and compiled, ran the tests fine, but needed a special flag in ./configure
17:03 <glozow> lightlike: xD
17:03 <theStack> lightlike: heh
17:03 <stickies-v> n, couldn't properly review so I'm here to lurk and learn
17:03 <larryruane> looked at the actual fix (easy!) but trying to puzzle out the test changes
17:03 <Dweezahr> ./configure --enable-experimental
17:03 <emzy> n, just read the notes.
17:04 <glozow> larryruane: awesome! did you try reproducing the bug and whatnot?
17:04 <theStack> n
17:04 <svav> I read the notes, but it seems like quite a difficult issue
17:04 <larryruane> i was just going to ask that ... isn't it a good review practice to run any new or modified test without the production code change, and make sure the test fails?
17:04 <larryruane> (sadly i didn't have time to do that)
17:04 <ccdle12> hi - semi reviewed
17:04 <glozow> larryruane: yeah! that's what i'd recommend.
17:05 <effexzi> N
17:05 <glozow> Is anybody able to summarize how the mining algorithm works?
17:05 <glozow> (and by mining, i mean block template building)
17:05 <glozow> Hint: we're looking at the code here https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L303
17:06 <svav> Well, firstly, it works to maximise profit for miner, right?
17:06 <glozow> svav: yes exactly. we want to maximize the total fees of the block.
17:06 <larryruane> because if we don't, miners are encouraged to write their own algorithms, and that disadvatages newcomer miners
17:06 <effexzi> Picks up a bunch of transactions, adds previous header, a nonce and hashes until difficulty is met.
17:07 <glozow> and it needs to be consensus-valid. Here, the most relevant constraints are = maximum block weight and sigops.
17:07 <stickies-v> at a VERY high level: sorting tx packages by their ancestor feerate and picking the highest fee rate ones until the block is full?
17:07 <glozow> stickies-v: yes, great start!
17:07 <glozow> What is ancestor feerate?
17:07 <stickies-v> the combined fee rate of a tx and all of its unconfirmed parents
17:07 <larryruane> i always forget about sigops ... is it common that a block is less than max weight because it's at the max sigops? or is that more of a sanity check?
17:08 <stickies-v> so, all the fees of tx + parents, divided by the weight of tx + parents
17:08 <glozow> effexzi: yeah that's the idea for mining in general. Right now we're specifically talking about the process of picking the transactions.
17:08 <glozow> larryruane: AFAIK, that's very uncommon
17:08 <larryruane> stickies-v: without double-(multiple-) counting, right? so if a tx has 2 parents, and each of those shares a parent, we count that "grandparent" only once?
17:09 <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> hm
17:09 <stickies-v> larryruane good point, yes it should be the unique set of ancestors
17:09 <glozow> stickies-v: not just parents :) parents' parents, parents' parents' parents, etc.
17:09 <glozow> in other words, a tx's ancestor set is the set of all transactions that it depends upon
17:09 <glozow> larryruane: correct, we don't double count.
17:10 <glozow> why ancestor feerate in particular?
17:10 <larryruane> so when a new block is mined, it's possible for a tx's ancestor fee (and ancestor size) to decrease since some of its ancestors may be included in the new block
17:10 <glozow> Relevant PR: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7600
17:10 <svav> Could someone  give a definition for mapTx?
17:11 <glozow> larryruane: yes exactly. a subset of your ancestors may be included without you.
17:11 <larryruane> is that the crazy multimap thing that is essentially the mempool??
17:11 <ccdle12> svav: the main datastructure in the mempool that tracks txs according 5 indexes
17:11 <glozow> larryruane: yes xD it's the multi-index container that stores all mempool entries
17:12 <glozow> here is the definition: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/txmempool.h#L458-L488
17:13 <svav> and a definition for mapModifiedTx for clarity? Thanks
17:13 <glozow> this transitions nicely into our next question - what is `mapModifiedTx` ?
17:13 <glozow> svav: haha jinx
17:13 <theStack> that is quite some lines of code for a single typedef ^^
17:13 <glozow> here is the typedef for `mapModifiedTx`: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/node/miner.h#L93-L108
17:14 <glozow> What is `mapModifiedTx` used for?
17:15 <lightlike> so it's kind of a poor man's mempool with just  one index?
17:15 <Dweezahr> like std multimap?
17:16 <Dweezahr> with modified transactions
17:16 <ccdle12> `mapModifiedTx` stores copies of txs in the mempool but only sorted by ancestor fee rate?
17:16 <svav> I am guessing now but ... is mapModifiedTx some sort of snapshot for a "potential" mempool, which has added a given transaction into the mempool to then evaluate total fee rates, and see how this compared to previous mapTx?
17:16 <stickies-v> we want to have a copy of the mempool where we can remove ancestors that have already been selected as part of a package, without actually affecting the mempool, I think?
17:16 <glozow> yes, it's not storing the same information as mapTx. How are they modified? When do we add a transaction to it?
17:17 <glozow> stickies-v: bingo
17:18 <glozow> lightlike: there are 2, you can index by iter and by ancestor feerate
17:18 <lightlike> oh, right
17:18 <lightlike> why do we call UpdatePackagesForAdded() right at the beginning of addPackageTxs() ? what could have been already added at this points so that we might need to change mapModifiedTx?
17:19 <glozow> lightlike: I'm not sure, I also had the same question
17:20 <glozow> AFAIK you can't pre-populate the template with transactions, but that would have been my guess
17:20 <lightlike> there is a comment talking about "previously added" transactions, but I didn't find any code that does that
17:21 <glozow> maybe it was removed and this wasn't cleaned up? idk
17:21 <glozow> Does everybody understand what `mapModifiedTx` is used for?
17:22 <glozow> To summarize, it contains transactions that have not been selected yet, but some subset of their ancestors have. So we can't just use the ancestor feerate cached in their mempool entries.
17:22 <glozow> (We don't modify the actual mempool while selecting transactions)
17:23 <svav> So basically it's a mechanism to ensure that fees available from packages are not erroneously counted multiple times?
17:23 <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> that is my understanding
17:23 <glozow> svav: yes, that's another way to look at it
17:23 <larryruane> and when you say some ancestors have been selected, you mean for inclusion in a block that we're creating?
17:24 <glozow> let's give a concrete example and we can use it for the next few questions
17:24 <glozow> Let's say you have tx C. It has parent B, and grandparent A. A <- B <- C
17:24 <glozow> Let's say A is 10sat/vB, B is 5sat/vB, and C is 1sat/vB
17:25 <glozow> mapTx says A's ancestor feerate is 10sat/vB, B's ancestor feerate is 7.5sat/vB, and C's is 5.3sat/vB
17:26 <glozow> A gets selected first. We store B and C in mapModifiedTx. B's new ancestor feerate is 5sat/vB. C's new ancestor feerate is 3sat/vB.
17:26 <glozow> This makes sense yes?
17:26 <glozow> larryruane: yes, selected = included in the block template we're building
17:26 <larryruane> (so we're assuming all tx are the same size)
17:26 <glozow> larryruane: correct. thanks
17:27 <stickies-v> makes sense!
17:27 <theStack> yup, that sounds alright
17:27 <larryruane> so this way, if we don't end up mining the next block, it's very easy to "undo" this
17:27 <glozow> larryruane: yep!
17:28 <larryruane> (we just toss out those entries in mapModifiedTx)
17:28 <glozow> Great. So in this example, what happens next? Which transaction gets selected for inclusion, and how do we update mapModifiedTx?
17:29 <theStack> B gets selected, and C is stored in mapModifiedTx with an ancestor feerate of 1sat/vB?
17:29 <glozow> theStack: exactly!
17:29 <larryruane> oh so C appears in mapModifiedTx twice?
17:30 <theStack> it's just updated i guess?
17:30 <larryruane> yes you're probably right
17:30 <glozow> yes, it's updated. there is only 1 entry.
17:30 <glozow> sorry for the confusion
17:30 <glozow> we update using `update_for_parent_inclusion`: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/node/miner.h#L115
17:31 <glozow> called here in `UpdatePackagesForAdded`: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L258
17:32 <glozow> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L251-L259
17:32 <glozow> here shows that it's updated. we have 2 branches: for creating a new entry and for updating an existing one.
17:32 <glozow> This brings us to the next question - notice anything fishy? What's the bug?
17:33 <theStack> so generally it's only ever the size and the fees which are updated separately, and the resulting feerate is calculated later when needed?
17:33 <theStack> (not referring to the bug, just a general question)
17:33 <glozow> theStack: yes
17:34 <glozow> CFeeRate doesn't remember what the size and amount were, so it's not possible to deduct a transaction from a package feerate that way.
17:34 <glozow> we have to just remember the total fees and total size
17:34 <theStack> ok that makes sense
17:35 <glozow> `CFeeRate` definition: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/policy/feerate.h#L29
17:36 <glozow> Anyone find the bug?
17:37 <larryruane> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L258 passes a closure (function pointer), which is why `update_for_parent_inclusion` has to be written in that operator() style? 
17:37 <glozow> larryruane: good question :) was going to be my bonus question
17:39 <stickies-v> I suppose the bug is that update_for_parent_inclusion uses GetFee instead of GetModifiedFee?
17:39 <svav> Finding this bug is way beyond my capabilities I'm afraid ;(
17:39 <lightlike>  when adjusting the modified entry, the actual feerate was used, not the modified one. so things would be wrong if miners had prioritised the transaction.
17:39 <glozow> larryruane: I think the answer is simply = this code was written before we used C++11, so you couldn't use lambdas
17:39 <glozow> stickies-v: winner winner
17:40 <stickies-v> it's the only changed line of code that's not in a test file ¯\_(ツ)_/¯
17:40 <glozow> lightlike: exactly
17:40 <glozow> stickies-v: very smart :P
17:40 <theStack> xD
17:40 <larryruane> so _normally_ the two are the same, but if the tx had its feerate modified (using the prioritisetransaction RPC, then it will be wrong without this fix
17:41 <glozow> larryruane: yeah. I'm not sure how common it is to use prioritisetransaction
17:41 <glozow> we didn't really have test coverage for it
17:41 <lightlike> yes, I was wondering wherther there is evidence/statistics of miners using prioritisetransaction much?
17:42 <larryruane> ok now i have a question, who is the world found this bug?? Oh the PR description (first comment) explains it, the result of an earlier review! that's great
17:42 <glozow> yeah, technically Marco found it
17:42 <stickies-v> oh okay so the "modified" in "GetModifiedFee" has nothing to do with the "modified" in "mapModifiedTx"?
17:43 <theStack> what is the real use case for prioritisetransaction? miners accepting bribes? :)
17:43 <glozow> stickies-v: correct, haha. a bit confusing
17:43 <sipa> or mining their own transactions
17:43 <theStack> (OTOH the mining fee itself is kind of a bribe already)
17:43 <theStack> sipa: makes sense yes
17:43 <glozow> theStack: lightlike: sipa: I think we should just get rid of it. And replace it with an option to force-include transactions in the template
17:43 <glozow> Would save 64b per mempool entry
17:44 <lightlike> or miners censoring transactions, the modification can also be negative
17:44 <randomcrow> marathon would be pleased
17:45 <theStack> lightlike: interesting point!
17:45 <larryruane> prioritysettransaction seems like one of those features that if core didn't implement it, someone else would (so may as well standardize it)
17:45 <glozow> lightlike: indeed. you can censor by prioritising with -MAX_MONEY
17:45 <larryruane> would it be easier to not let the tx into the mempool in the first place?
17:46 <glozow> larryruane: I mostly disagree. If it's a feature that a small fraction of miners (also small fraction of users) use, seems unnecessary.
17:46 <larryruane> really basic question: the mempool gets persisted to disk, right? so if the node goes down, then when we come back up again, we'll have the mempool from before, with all the modifications?
17:47 <glozow> larryruane: modified fees are used in mempool acceptance logic, too. If you prioritise with a negative amount, it'll also not make it into your mempool
17:47 <glozow> code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/validation.cpp#L822
17:48 <larryruane> glozow: :+1
17:48 <theStack> playing devils advocate: maybe prioritisetransaction will be used more once blocks get full regularly in the future (right now they aren't)
17:48 <theStack> not saying that this a strong or good argument to keep it though
17:48 <glozow> larryruane: yes, fee deltas are persisted to disk. code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/094d9fda5ccee7d78a2e3d8b1eec17b8b6a33466/src/validation.cpp#L4729-L4731
17:49 <glozow> theStack: it would be nice if people could fee-bump the normal way :) if people need to pay miners out-of-band, there's something wrong with our fee bumping
17:49 <glozow>  it is a valid argument though ofc
17:50 <theStack> glozow: true! i assume with "normal" you mean both RBF and CPFP?
17:50 <glozow> yep!
17:51 <glozow> we have one more question that we haven't covered from the notes: Why is MAX_CONSECUTIVE_FAILURES necessary? code here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f3e0ace8ecd84009a23da6b0de47f01d79c45772/src/node/miner.cpp#L323
17:51 <randomcrow> spam
17:53 <Dweezahr> as the first items do no longer fit, it is unlikely that future items will fit as they are decremental
17:53 <theStack> seems to be used to avoid taking too much time building a block which is almost full anyway
17:53 <lightlike> to save time - aborting early instead of trying out the entire mempool when the block is almost full so most transaction won't fit anymore.
17:53 <glozow> yep exactly
17:54 <glozow> like if we only have 5 weight units left, which no transaction will fit
17:54 <glozow> there's no need to try every transaction in the mempool
17:54 <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> so its a probability thing, if we start failing a lot, the liklihood of finding a transaction that does fit drops
17:54 <theStack> i wonder where the magic number 4000 comes from btw... is this derived from a consensus limit on how large the coinbase is allowed to be? (if there is such a limit)
17:54 <larryruane> would you say it's an anti-DOS measure too?
17:55 <glozow> larryruane: not really. nobody can force you to build a block template
17:56 <stickies-v> and you also have your mempool size limit, in case someone wanted to spam you with a trillion transactions
17:57 <glozow> theStack: oh that's a good question. I'm not sure, maybe sipa knows? code added here https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/9868/
17:57 <larryruane> glozow: the code you linked to most recently, `addPackageTxs` ... git blame seems to show it was added 6 years ago, is that accurate? I thought packages were a recent addition (that you mostly implemented)
17:57 <Dweezahr> why was int64_t chosen over uint64_t?
17:57 <glozow> larryruane: nope. I'm adding packages to mempool validation logic. We've had packages in mempool and miner for years!
17:58 <larryruane> ok, TIL ... even though they haven't been used (because not supported by P2P)? Or do I have that wrong?
17:58 <svav> It will be something to do with that it's 4 x 1000
17:58 <svav> The 4 is a conversion factor
17:58 <glozow> Dweezahr: which item are you referring to?
17:59 <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> I think int64_t is parsed by this object that outputs JSON
17:59 <Dweezahr> nConsecutiveFailed
17:59 <theStack> svav: yes, 4000 WU = 1000 vbytes... but then, where do the 1000 come from? :p
17:59 <sipa> glozow theStack My (vague) recollection is that these min/max weight limits on blocks were there before.
17:59 <sipa> Having a max size is useful, in case the exact size of the coinbase isn't known yet.
18:00 <glozow> I guess a max 1000vB coinbase sounds reasonable
18:00 <theStack> indeed
18:00 <glozow> Ah we're out of time. Thanks for coming everyone!
18:01 <lightlike> larryruane: I think the package logic has been used, child-pays-for-parent works after all. It's just that the parent currently needs a high enough feerate to make it into the mempool  (even if it's not enough to get mined) 
18:01 <glozow> I'm looking for somebody to host next week, so if you're interested please lmk!
18:01 <glozow> #endmeeting
18:01 <theStack> thanks for hosting glozow! that was fun
18:01 <emzy> Thank you glozow and all!
18:01 <lightlike> thanks glozow !
18:01 <larryruane> glozow: thanks! 
18:02 <glozow> Yeah larryruane: to answer your question about the packages, the nice thing is we've had CPFP for 6 years, but the problem is it only works for transactions already in the mempool.
18:02 <stickies-v> ty glozow  and everyone for the discussion!
18:02 <Kaizen_Kintsugi_> thank you! I learned a lot
18:02 <larryruane> makes sense glozow thanks
18:02 <svav> Thanks glozow and all!
18:03 <glozow> and Dweezahr: not sure why it's a signed integer. really it could just be a uint16
{% endirc %}
