---
layout: pr
date: 2022-03-16
title: "Add 'sendall' RPC née sweep"
pr: 24118
authors: [Xekyo]
components: ["wallet", "rpc"]
host: Xekyo
status: past
commit: 93f37c00dd
---

## Notes

- The RPCs `fundrawtransaction`, `send`, `sendmany`, and `sendtoaddress` have
  `subtract_fee_from_outputs`, `subtractfeefrom`, and `subtractfeefromamount`
  arguments/options respectively. As these all implement the same behavior,
  we'll refer to them collectively as subtractfeefromamount (SFFA). For outputs
  marked with SFFA, the amount assigned to the recipient is reduced
  corresponding to the transaction's fee. If multiple outputs of a transaction
  are marked, the fee is split equally among them.

- The _effective value_ of a UTXO is the result of its value minus the fees
  necessary to spend it. The effective value therefore is dependent on the
  current fee rate and UTXOs with a low value will have a negative effective
  value at sufficiently high fee rates.

- [PR #17331](/17331) updated the wallet to use effective value in its coin
  selection. This allowed to use a fixed selection target calculated from the
  remaining parts of the transaction while inputs already had accounted for
  their own cost, whereas previously the selection was trying to hit a dynamic
  selection target as the fees needed to be amended to reflect the increasing
  count of inputs.

- Around the same time, the wallet's default behavior was updated to skip
  inputs with a negative effective value, under the assumption that users would
  prefer to defer usage of an input rather than paying more than its value for
  it to be spent.

- In concert, these changes
  [broke](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/23026) an established
  pattern for emptying a wallet by calling `getbalance` and using
  `fundrawtransaction` with SFFA by specifying the full balance.

- After some attempts had been made to reconcile effective values with SFFA,
  [PR #24118](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118) was proposed as
  an alternative solution. It allows users to send all UTXOs in the wallet.


## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
   NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. When would you use `sendall` and when SFFA?

1. A [comment](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118#issuecomment-1024920250) suggested that
   this RPC is potentially unsafe to have. Do you agree with this, and why?

1. Why are `send_max` and `inputs` exclusive options?

1. Why is `sendall` restricted to spend only confirmed UTXOs?

1. Why are there two ways of specifying recipients?

1. Looking at the cleanup decorator in the tests, can you guess where in the
   codebase `sendall` may find use?

1. How are the fee estimation instructions up for interpretation?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <Murch> #startmeeting

17:00 <svav> Hi

17:00 <Murch> Welcome to PR review club. Today we're looking at #24118: Add 'sendall' RPC née sweep

17:00 <brunoerg> Hi

17:00 <ls55> Hi

17:00 <lightlike> hi

17:00 <hernanmarino_> Hi 

17:00 <kouloumos> hi

17:01 <Murch> Did you review the PR? Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK?

17:01 <achow101> hi

17:01 <larryruane> hi

17:02 <B_1o1> hi all

17:02 <svav> No but I read the notes

17:02 <Murch> Also, a reminder: if you have any questions of comments, you don't need to ask to say anything, just go right ahead! :)

17:02 <michaelfolkson> hi

17:02 <otech> hello

17:02 <brunoerg> Concept ACK

17:02 <larryruane> compiled, ran tests, concept ACK, haven't review code much

17:02 <lightlike> didnt review the code much, but I tried it out on regtest.

17:03 <Murch> Alright, would someone like to give a one sentence summary of what the PR is trying to achieve?

17:03 <larryruane> I like how the functional tests log what they're doing!

17:03 <larryruane> clean out a wallet? :)

17:03 <josibake> hi

17:03 <Murch> Thanks, larryruane

17:04 <hernanmarino_> Concept ACK here, no time to review this week

17:04 <Murch> Yes, it adds a new PR that can be used to send all funds from the wallet to a destination.

17:04 <josibake> Concept ACK (read the notes, ran tests, light code review)

17:04 <ls55> Compiled, tested and tACK

17:04 <Murch> Sweet, thanks for all the review :)

17:04 <svav> Provide a way to clear a wallet after the previous way was broken

17:04 <Murch> svav: Good point, how was the previous way broken?

17:05 <ls55> Which is the previous way ?

17:06 <kouloumos> haven't tested what's stated in the notes but is says  that the wallet’s default behavior was updated to skip inputs with a negative effective value which broke an established pattern for emptying a wallet by calling `getbalance` and using `fundrawtransaction` with SFFA by specifying the full balance

17:06 <Murch> ls55: previously, you would probably do a call to `getbalance` and then do a `send` with that amount as the recipient amount but flag the output as "subtract_fee_from_output"

17:06 <hernanmarino_> afaik previous changes attempting SFFA made it imposible to include some inputs, if i understood correctly

17:07 <brunoerg> hernanmarino_: because of negative values? 

17:07 <Murch> Yes, there was a conflict between getting the full balance of your wallet and the wallet by default filtering out the uneconomical UTXOs when building a transaction

17:07 <Murch> It would lead to cases where you wouldn't be able to select an amount as large as the full balance

17:08 <hernanmarino_> brunoerg: yes, i believe that's the case

17:09 <Murch> Okay, so now that we're introducing `sendall`, why do we still have `SFFO`?

17:09 <Murch> When would you use one and when the other?

17:09 <josibake> might be a silly question but what is the difference between SFFA and SFFO?

17:09 <hernanmarino_> sendall, when you want to empty your wallet

17:10 <achow101> josibake: there is none. we just hate naming things consistently

17:10 <Murch> josibake: Not a silly question, but it's actually the same, but had like three or four names on different RPCs

17:10 <josibake> Murch, achow101: lol nice

17:10 <brunoerg> lol

17:11 <Murch> hernanmarino: Yes, although we also permit specifying a set of UTXOs to be used as inputs specifically

17:11 <josibake> id still want SFF[A,O], if i want to fully spend a UTXO

17:11 <josibake> e.g sending a UTXO from an old address type to a new address type 

17:11 <hernanmarino_> Murch: great, didn't notice that

17:11 <Murch> I'd actually suggest to use `sendall` then ^^

17:11 <larryruane> "When would you use one and when the other?" -- is it a matter of whether we want to pay someone a specific amount, versus we're really paying ourselves (so the exact amount of value transferred isn't that important)?

17:11 <Murch> Although you can do it by crafting a raw transaction directly of course

17:12 <Murch> larryruane: Yes, paying yourself can play a role.

17:12 <Murch> I wouldn't say that's the best way to delineate it, though

17:12 <ls55> Murch: Thanks

17:13 <ls55> `Sendall` is to be used when the user wants to use given UTXOs to pay a destination and SFFA when the user wants to use a given budget to pay an address.

17:13 <Murch> ls55: Right!

17:13 <lightlike> SFFO if I want to pay up to a given max amount or with the recipient paying for the fees, but I don't want to micromanage UTXOs

17:13 <larryruane> with SFFO, the wallet is doing the coin selection? whereas with `sendall`, it's being told which UTXOs to use?

17:13 <Murch> Also, `sendall` will never create a change output, while SFFO will totally do that

17:13 <Murch> lightlike: Yes!

17:13 <otech> (y)

17:14 <Murch> larryruane: Correct

17:14 <hernanmarino_> Murch: your last point is interesting 

17:14 <Murch> So, `sendall` will either use all UTXOs in the default mode, or a specific subset when it's defined, and `sffo` will use a specific budget to create an output.

17:15 <larryruane> I guess we wouldn't want to create a change output if we're trying to empty out the wallet! (?)

17:15 <Murch> Which means that with `sffo` the input selection is left to the wallet, and the poor recipient may pay for a single input or fifteen, depending on your wallet's UTXO pool composition ^^

17:15 <Murch> larryruane: Right!

17:15 <josibake> interesting, i didnt realize SFFO can be used with a change output, but that makes sense

17:15 <Murch> Okay, now that we know what was the previous toolset and what we have now:

17:15 <Murch> A comment suggested that this RPC is potentially unsafe to have. Do you agree with this, and why?

17:16 <Murch> "This sweep API might be less safe than send APIs because it doesn't force you to specify amount you are trying to send. It's easier to fat-finger by accidentally sweeping the wrong wallet[…]."

17:16 <ls55> Yes, there is a valid concern. This RPC enables unsuspecting users can send an amount larger than they intended. The other send RPCs force the user to specify amount.

17:17 <brunoerg> Yes, I agree

17:17 <lightlike> I think, also thieves could clean out our wallet non-interactively now if they manage to get us send a single command. before, they would have hat to guess the amount or interactively query the balance first.

17:17 <brunoerg> ls55: +1

17:17 <hernanmarino_> I personally do not thinks this is a big concern ..

17:17 <josibake> lightlike: great point 

17:19 <otech> I think it is valid, but not extremely concerning... not the theft concern but the larger than expected amount concern maybe should be addressed

17:19 <josibake> idk if id characterize it as "unsafe". unsafe, in my mind, implies there is something that can be exploited/bad even if the user is using it correctly 

17:19 <larryruane> maybe the user could specify a maximum amount, and the RPC fails if this is exceeded?

17:19 <Murch> lightlike: I guess that's true, but either way they would have to have access to your cli at that point, which means they could run both commands, or have gained your trust enough that you just run a command that says "sendall" in your terminal to one of their addresses ^^

17:19 <larryruane> (i.e. a sanity check)

17:19 <josibake> whereas the examples here are more pointing out it can be a potential foot gun 

17:19 <achow101> It is a valid concern, but I don't think that it's something we need to address

17:20 <brunoerg> maybe it's a dangerous command, not unsafe

17:20 <Murch> larryruane: Yeah, I guess that would be possible, but it would also severely compromise the UX improvement this new RPC provides in the first place

17:20 <achow101> I think the RPC name is also pretty obvious as what it does

17:20 <achow101> moreso than the previous name of sweep

17:21 <josibake> achow101: +1, the name already implies use with caution

17:21 <B_1o1> brunoerg: +1

17:21 <larryruane> achow101: yes, or we could even rename it `sendallandwereallydomeanall`

17:21 <larryruane> (JK)

17:21 <Murch> haha

17:22 <Murch> Randomly need to respond to a call back with "yes", "yes, I'm sure" "go ahead already" :p

17:22 <Murch> okay, moving on

17:22 <hernanmarino_> :P

17:22 <Murch> Why are send_max and inputs exclusive options?

17:22 <ls55> achow101: +1

17:23 <ls55> `send_max` changes the default behavior of spending all UTXOs to maximizing the output amount of the transaction by skipping uneconomic UTXOs. So this doesn't allow users to choose UTXOs as they can choose uneconomical ones.

17:24 <Murch> ls55: Yeah, they both specify or restrict which UTXOs will be used by the transaction, but if you want an explicit set, it wouldn't be completely clear whether you want it forced so, or post-filtered.

17:24 <Murch> So we choose to interpret specifying both as an "unclear" and don't proceed

17:25 <otech> Makes sense

17:25 <Murch> Why is sendall restricted to spend only confirmed UTXOs?

17:27 <ls55> Because it is safer, I think.  `wallet::CachedTxIsTrusted()` validates this (if UTXOs are confirmed).

17:27 <josibake> you don't have to worry about complexity with replacable tx's if you only spend confirmed 

17:28 <Murch> Yep, that's part of it

17:29 <ls55> in the case of Bitcoin Core, confirmed means >= 1 and not >= 6, correct?

17:29 <josibake> also (forgot to check), confirmed means 1 conf in this context? iirc `AvailableCoins` first prefers 6 conf and then relaxes to 1

17:29 <Murch> Another reason is that if the parent transactions had low feerates, our transaction might have a lower feerate than we aimed for, because Bitcoin Core currently does not bump low feerate parents automagically yet

17:30 <achow101> josibake: we can set our own confirmation requirements. iirc it's 1 for sendall

17:30 <Murch> Yes, since we're trying to clear out the wallet completely, we relax it to anything confirmed

17:30 <Murch> Generally, spending unconfirmed UTXOs is just more complicated, and it doesn't really align well with the use-case of emptying a wallet completely

17:30 <achow101> AvailableCoins itself does not filter for number of confirmations

17:31 <Murch> If you want to empty it, why are you still receiving new funds to it?

17:31 <ls55> Murch: But why would this (low feerates) be a problem in `sendall` but not in the other `send..` commands?

17:31 <larryruane> "... does not bump low feerate parents automagically yet" -- is that what package relay will solve?

17:31 <Murch> ls55: We also never spend foreign unconfirmed outputs in regular transactions. We just allow to spend unconfirmed change if we're unable to send a transaction otherwise

17:32 <josibake> achow101: you're right, my bad,  its later `AttemptSelection`

17:32 <Murch> larryruane: No, package relay ensures that a parent with a feerate below the dynamic minRelayTxFeeRate will still propagate if the child is affluent enough

17:32 <ls55> achow101: I think `AvailableCoins` calls `wallet::CachedTxIsTrusted()` which filters for number of confirmations, doesn't it ?

17:33 <B_1o1> Murch: is this RPC change also aimed to help reduce the UXTO set?

17:33 <achow101> It will check for at least 1 confirmation. But it can also be told to allow untrusted utxos

17:33 <Murch> larryruane: https://github.com/Xekyo/bitcoin/commit/c50030817637356cbef79e41bc702bdb7c3c0363 <- this may help with that, though :)

17:33 <Murch> Eventually

17:34 <josibake> ls55: i think it just checks for negative nDepth, which filters out conflicts

17:34 <Murch> B_1o1: How do you mean?

17:34 <Murch> It could be used to create a consolidation transaction to yourself, if that's what you mean, yes.

17:35 <Murch> Why are there two ways of specifying recipients on `sendall`?

17:36 <B_1o1> Murch: I meant by being able to sweep uneconomic UTXOs and consolidate

17:36 <Murch> I see

17:36 <Murch> Bitcoin Core is already somewhat aggressively spending uneconomic UTXOs by default, so I don't think this PR will have a big impact on that

17:37 <lightlike> to allow for the use case of doing a payment with some part, and cleaning out the rest?

17:37 <larryruane> "Why are there two ways of specifying recipients on `sendall`?" -- because you may or may not want to specify an amount?

17:37 <Murch> lightlike: Correct

17:37 <ls55> josibake:

17:37 <ls55> ``

17:37 <ls55> bool CachedTxIsTrusted(const CWallet& wallet, const CWalletTx& wtx, std::set<uint256>& trusted_parents)

17:37 <ls55> {

17:37 <ls55>     AssertLockHeld(wallet.cs_wallet);

17:37 <ls55>     int nDepth = wallet.GetTxDepthInMainChain(wtx);

17:37 <ls55>     if (nDepth >= 1) return true;

17:37 <ls55>     if (nDepth < 0) return false;

17:37 <ls55> ``

17:37 <ls55> I think it accepts nDepth >= 1

17:38 <ls55> I think `sendall` does not call `AttemptSelection` at any point

17:38 <Murch> I think available coins should generally filter unconfirmed foreign UTXOs but there is at least some eligibility filters that will permit unconfirmed change outputs that were sent by your own wallet to itself

17:38 <Murch> ls55: That is correct

17:38 <lightlike> why is it possible to have multiple recipients with an unspecified amount, that each get the same share? Is there a particular use case for that?

17:39 <Murch> Since `sendall` already knows the UTXOs it will spend (either all, all economic, or a given set), we don't need to run coin selection.

17:39 <larryruane> hope this isn't too high-level of a question: I assume most transactions don't come from the bitcoin core wallet, so when we make an improvement like this, is part of the reason to provide a (working) model for other wallet devs to follow?

17:39 <Murch> lightlike: E.g. if you always sweep your wallet at the end of the week between two business partners, or similar

17:40 <Murch> larryruane: Aha, may I turn that into the next question?

17:40 <Murch> Beyond emptying wallets, and especially with a glance at the cleanup decorator in the tests, can you guess where in the codebase sendall may         find use?

17:41 <larryruane> sorry can you explain what the cleanup decorator is? I don't know that term

17:41 <josibake> lightlike: in the case of sweeping a wallet, tedium. i might know that i want 5 utxos in the new wallet , but dont really want to do the match and right out all the amounts 

17:42 <Murch> also, larryruane, yeah, I think that while Bitcoin Core wallet won't be the wallet with the most and coolest features, I think we should aim to provide an example of what a wallet should be able to do and how that could work

17:42 <larryruane> oh i see! some more python for me to learn :)

17:42 <ls55> I am not sure I understand this question. Aside from `sendall` itself, the only RPC that exists in def cleanup` is `getbalances`.

17:42 <larryruane> ls55: it's in the python test

17:42 <Murch> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118/files#diff-904d2e2d19041ffe0de3d038df31dc4cbb7a548f461c96333cd3a5486eaf50d2R17

17:43 <josibake> seems like this rpc could be really useful in functional testing 

17:43 <Murch> ls55: Sorry, what I mean is, where else might be an RPC to empty wallets useful?

17:43 <Murch> josibake: Bingo

17:43 <lightlike> so the other use case would be to clean out a wallet between two tests, so that it doesn't have any unwanted utxos that might meddle with later tests.

17:43 <Murch> :D

17:44 <josibake> lightlike: ++1

17:44 <larryruane> may be too much to explain here, murch, but what are those `@cleanup` doing? (it's okay if too much to say)

17:44 <ls55> lightlike: ++1

17:44 <Murch> It's a decorator that gets called after the corresponding function that it's on

17:44 <achow101> we happen to have a few tests that use sffo to empty a wallet. sendall would be a suitable replacement for them

17:45 <larryruane> achow101: good idea, would that be better as a separate PR or included in this one?

17:45 <Murch> It is a convenient way of defining an "after()" for all the tests, because we don't have that in the Bitcoin Core python testing framework

17:45 <otech> (y) (y) (y)

17:45 <Murch> achow101 has been very supportive of this PR because he wants to use it to fix a bunch of the tests ^^

17:46 <josibake> there are also tests that use the premined chain for performance, but you end up with a bunch of coinbase utxos. this might be a nice way to use the premined regtest chain but then clean out the wallet before starting 

17:46 <Murch> larryruane: it'll be a separate PR, though

17:46 <achow101> larryruane: decorators are things in python that wrap a function. decorators take a function, and can do stuff before and after the function is run. @cleanup in particular runs the function, then cleans up the wallet after the test

17:46 <otech> Thanks for explanation of the cleanup decorator... adds learning value to this review club !

17:47 <Murch> How are the fee estimation instructions up for interpretation?

17:47 <ls55> `conf_target`, `estimate_mode` and `fee_rate` ?

17:47 <Murch> (This refers to one of the extracted functions in an earlier commit)

17:47 <Murch> ls55: yes, go on

17:47 <B_1o1> otech: +1

17:49 <Murch> I'm referring to `static void InterpretFeeEstimationInstructions(const UniValue& conf_target, const UniValue& estimate_mode, const UniValue& fee_rate, UniValue& options)`

17:49 <larryruane> Murch: where are those instructions? in the `sendall` help?

17:50 <Murch> Okay, sorry my question isn't greatly phrased

17:50 <Murch> What I mean is, why do we have an extra function to figure out what feerate the user wants us to use?

17:50 <Murch> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118/files#diff-26141d9c7da21eeb4b9e3ffedfaad83212d4710a9e62888f7abea076ca1d0538R57

17:51 <larryruane> factored out because of use by both `send` and `sendall`! brilliant!

17:51 <Murch> thanks :)

17:52 <larryruane> BTW I love how the commits are organized, refactorings in separate commits, excellent lesson for us all

17:52 <Murch> So, these RPCs allow different ways of specifying the fee rate. You can either give a specific fee rate in sat/vB, or you can provide a block target in number of blocks you'd like this transaction to be confirmed in

17:53 <Murch> if you go with the latter, you also may specify the estimation mode, which can be either  `CONSERVATIVE` or `ECONOMICAL`

17:53 <Murch> Now, even worse, you can provide these either as positional arguments or as options

17:53 <ls55> "the commits are organized, refactorings in separate commits" that is great and make the reviews easier

17:53 <Murch> So, we need to figure out what the user passed, that no conflicting information was provided and what feerate to take from it.

17:54 <Murch> thanks larryruane and ls55 

17:54 <Murch> So, this was the questions I had prepared. Any more comments or questions?

17:55 <otech> Why are these arguments located here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118/files#diff-26141d9c7da21eeb4b9e3ffedfaad83212d4710a9e62888f7abea076ca1d0538R1270-R1273

17:55 <otech> But then only `fee_rate` is located here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118/files#diff-26141d9c7da21eeb4b9e3ffedfaad83212d4710a9e62888f7abea076ca1d0538R1279

17:56 <josibake> still reading through all of the feedback on the PR, but is there a TLDR as to why a new RPC was the agreed on approach vs adding a parameter to existing RPCs?

17:57 <larryruane> Murch: one nit (i could leave as a PR comment), at the beginning of the description, i think `fSubtractFeeAmount` should be `fSubtractFeeFromAmount`?

17:58 <larryruane> (i looked up that symbol in my trusty vscode and couldn't find it!)

17:58 <achow101> otech: conf_target and estimate_mode are in FundTxDoc

17:58 <Murch> otech: good catch

17:58 <Murch> larryruane: You are correct, thanks

17:58 <Murch> will apply

17:59 <achow101> josibake: we had discussed how that would look in e.g. send, but the api always came out kind of ugly.

17:59 <Murch> josibake: it's not clear to me how you would achieve the same with a new parameter

17:59 <otech> achow101 ah yes I see it thanks https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/24118/files#diff-26141d9c7da21eeb4b9e3ffedfaad83212d4710a9e62888f7abea076ca1d0538R456

17:59 <achow101> it would be something like either checking that the amount == balance, or use some magic value for the amount

18:00 <Murch> like being allowed to pass "EVERYTHING" for the amount of an output?

18:00 <Murch> Okay, that's time! Thanks for coming

18:00 <Murch> #endmeeting

{% endirc %}
