---
layout: pr
date: 2022-08-17
title: "Add util::Result failure values, multiple error and warning messages"
pr: 25665
authors: [ryanofsky]
components: ["refactoring"]
host: stickies-v
status: past
commit: 590bc615a
---

## Notes

- This PR is a followup to [#25218](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25218) introducing helper class `BResult`, which we discussed in a [previous review club](https://bitcoincore.reviews/25218).

- In [#25721](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25721) `BResult` was renamed to `util::Result`, and the interface modified to resemble that of `std::optional`.

- The description of this latest PR [#25665](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25665) comprehensively lists the introduced changes, as well as useful information on history and alternatives. In summary, the proposed functional changes compared to the initial `BResult` design are to:
  - allow a result to have both a value and an error message, instead of just one of both.
  - allow a result to store multiple errors and warnings, instead of just a single error.
  - allow multiple results to be chained, where a `util::Result` can be instantiated from another `util::Result` and take over its errors and warnings.

- This PR is quite heavy on generic programming and templating. Since `util::Result` is a helper class, we want it to be usable in a wide range of use cases, and can't make assumptions about the types of values it will hold.

- The `util::Result` class draws parallels with the Rust [`std::result Result`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) type.

## Questions
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. Which use cases previously not handled well by `util::Result` does this PR target? Why did `util::Result` need an upgrade to be compatible with `LoadChainState()` and `VerifyLoadedChainState()`?

1. [#25721](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25721) states `BResult` had a less familiar interface than the well-known `std::optional`. Is that a good enough reason to change it? What other reason(s) do you see for this change?

1. What is a `union`? Why is [`m_value`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L91) a `union` type when it holds just one member?

1. In [`template <typename T, typename F> class ResultBase`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L39-L40), what do `T` and `F` represent conceptually?

1. Why does [#25665](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25665) implement custom [`Construct` methods](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L156-L187) instead of just using the regular constructor methods?

1. For which type(s) `T` is [`util::detail::MoveElements(T& src, T& dest)`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L23-L28) instantiated? Do you think a templated approach makes sense here?

1. What is the purpose of having differents structs [`Warning` and `Error`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L129-L134) when they both just wrap a `bilingual_str`. Could we just use an alias instead?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <stickies-v> #startmeeting
17:00 <pablomartin_> hi all
17:00 <larryruane_> hi
17:00 <brunoerg> hi
17:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 <aryan_> 👋
17:01 <Amirreza> Hi
17:01 <stickies-v> welcome everyone! Today we're looking at #25665, authored by ryanofsky. The notes and questions are available on https://bitcoincore.reviews/25665
17:01 <schmidty_> hi
17:01 <juancama> Hey everyone
17:02 <stickies-v> anyone joining us for the first time today? even if you're just lurking, feel free to say hi!
17:02 <furszy> hi
17:02 <bot_21> hi
17:02 <hernanmarino> Hi !
17:02 <aryan_> First timer here.
17:02 <effexzi> Hi every1 
17:03 <stickies-v> whoo, welcome aryan_ ! glad to have you here. don't hold back on asking questions if anything's unclear!
17:05 <pablomartin> welcome aryan_!
17:05 <stickies-v> today's meeting is fairly technical and focuses on a couple of c++ libraries/techniques that aren't very often used in the codebase. as a quick disclaimer, i'm fairly new to c++ myself so don't take anything I say as gospel either haha. 
17:05 <stickies-v> who got the chance to review the PR or read the notes? (y/n)
17:05 <pablomartin> y
17:05 <hernanmarino> y
17:05 <aryan_> y
17:05 <Lov3r_Of_Bitcoin> y
17:05 <Amirreza> y
17:05 <michaelfolkson> y
17:05 <brunoerg> y
17:05 <juancama> y
17:06 <larryruane_> y
17:06 <bot_21> n
17:06 <stickies-v> what a y streak, oh my! and great to see some of you having commented on the PR already as well
17:06 <stickies-v> for those of you who were able to review, would you give it a Concept ACK, Approach ACK, Tested ACK, or NACK?
17:06 <sipa> n
17:06 <aryan_> Approach ACK
17:06 <Amirreza> Tested Ack
17:06 <brunoerg> Concept ACK
17:07 <larryruane_> I have to say, though, this is the most confused I've ever been for a review club. This is well beyond my c++ understanding 
17:07 <pablomartin> Concept ACK and tested ACK
17:07 <hernanmarino> Tested ACK, but have some doubts on some technical details of the implementation
17:07 <stickies-v> larryruane_: glad to hear I wasn't alone in that
17:08 <stickies-v> hernanmarino: care to share what they are? or will we cover them in the questions?
17:08 <brunoerg> larryruane_: +1
17:08 <aryan_> Ditto. This is the first C++ I've looked at in ~8 years though so I guess to be expected.
17:08 <michaelfolkson> Yeah Concept ACK, a little hazy on moving from BResult to this though
17:09 <hernanmarino> I just don know the answer for a couple of questions, let's talk later :)
17:09 <aryan_> If we're free to share doubts or uncertainties, is it typical to override the `bool` operator to allow for success checks in this way? Is it typical to override the bool operator to allow to check for success/failures in this way? https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25665/files#diff-dd552c1ad61f5e2027fcef75f3a0ba027d69b5617931b3574e5d6ef2d3cbebe5R77
17:09 <stickies-v> quick note before diving into the questions: the PR has been updated slightly since these notes were released, so the current commit hashes are different but the actual changes are limited to comments. I'll keep linking to the "old" (590bc61) commits here.
17:09 <aryan_> Please feel free to answer later, just something that hung me up.
17:09 <larryruane_> what I desperately need to do is go through `result_tests.cpp` and really understand the test cases, simplest first, and maybe even write some test cases of my own (like when you're learning a new language), or try varying the existing test cases
17:10 <stickies-v> aryan_: iirc that's to keep parity with how std::optional is implemented, but would need to double check
17:11 <stickies-v> yep: "When an object of type optional<T> is contextually converted to bool, the conversion returns true if the object contains a value and false if it does not contain a value." (https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/optional)
17:11 <stickies-v> (your link didn't actually point me to a diff so lmk if that's not an answer to your question)
17:11 <sipa> Is it a "operator bool()" or an "explicit operator bool()" ?
17:12 <aryan_> But this one here is true if `m_info` (or `m_info->failure) is empty. This means that it'll return false if there's a value but no `m_info`.
17:12 <stickies-v> larryruane_: yeah that's a good point, tests are very often a good starting point (besides docs) to understanding the use case/effects of a certain feature/change
17:13 <aryan_>     //! Success check.
17:13 <aryan_>     operator bool() const { return !m_info || !m_info->failure; }
17:13 <sipa> Before C++11, operator bool() existed for implicit conversion to bool, but it had lots of non-obvious ways to trigger it (e.g. you could write "obj + 3", and if obj had an operator bool, it'd evaluate to 3 or 4").
17:13 <sipa> Since C++11 you can use "explicit operator bool()" to avoid many such cases.
17:14 <pablomartin> thanks sipa
17:15 <stickies-v> aryan_: if returns true either there is no `ErrorInfo m_info`at all (i.e. success), or if there is an `ErrorInfo m_info` but it doesn't contain failure data. this is because the new `Result` implementation can also store warnings, which still mean the function returned successfully
17:16 <aryan_> Right, right. It seems to means of gauging success. Just feels odd to use the `bool` operator for that. Having a successful result with a value present return false is just something new, I guess.
17:16 <stickies-v> alright moving on to the first question: which use cases previously not handled well by `util::Result` does this PR target? Why did `util::Result` need an upgrade to be compatible with `LoadChainState()` and `VerifyLoadedChainState()`?
17:16 <sipa> operator bool() is generally a bad idea
17:16 <stickies-v> aryan_:  we'll actually cover why that parity with std::optional is important in the next question!
17:17 <Amirreza> I think having multiple errors and warnings.
17:17 <hernanmarino> Uses cases : allow a result to have both a value and an error message,to store multiple errors and for multiple results to be chained. 
17:17 <sipa> std::optional has "explicit operator bool()", not "operator bool()".
17:17 <aryan_> `Result` now allows a value AND an error message to be returned. It also allows for multiple errors/warnings. Lastly, `Result`s are now chainable (you can instantiate a `Result` with another `Result`)
17:18 <Amirreza> And also I think they support more types for Error value (not just string)
17:18 <hernanmarino> and LoadChainState() needed to return a value on Errors, not only on success, something not possible before this PR
17:18 <brunoerg> It also allows to return a value on failure, not just a value on success I guess
17:19 <brunoerg> hernanmarino: +1
17:19 <pablomartin> yeah, to have both value and error messages, store multiple of them, and buid them on top of them 
17:19 <stickies-v> Amirreza: hernanmarino aryan_ brunoerg pablomartin yes that pretty much covers it all! and nice one catching the chaining bit aryan_ , since that wasn't covered in the PR description
17:20 <michaelfolkson> Oh and with BResult you could only have one, ok
17:20 <larryruane_> pablomartin: but I think not storing multiple values... only multiple error and warnings
17:20 <larryruane_> (maybe that's what you meant)
17:20 <stickies-v> michaelfolkson: yep indeed, but for example LoadChainState() returns both a status code and an (optional) error string
17:20 <stickies-v> single value, multiple errors/warnings indeed! thanks larryruane_ 
17:20 <pablomartin> larryuane_ yeah, i meant multiple of the previous (values and error msgs)
17:21 <furszy> i'm a bit hesitant here, warnings are another specialization of the error field. Not sure if it's something that should be placed on the base ErrorInfo class.
17:22 <pablomartin> larryuane: got you, thanks!
17:22 <stickies-v> so bonus question... what if we have a function that needs to return multiple values on failure? should we extend `Result` to handle that?
17:22 <stickies-v> furszy: I think the distinction is meaningful because warnings don't change whether the function returned successfully?
17:24 <Amirreza> stickies-v: Currently by using the error-vectors we can do this, am I correct? But not return multiple value with different types.
17:24 ← juancama6 left (~juancama@pool-74-96-218-208.washdc.fios.verizon.net): 
17:24 <aryan_> I think warnings _DO_ change whether the function returned successfully (that bool I hate so much will end up returning false if there's a warning which means it failed).
17:24 <larryruane_> stickies-v: I would say no because the return value can be a `std::tuple`
17:24 <aryan_> +1 @larryuane_
17:24 <stickies-v> Amirreza: we only use vectors for error and warnings *messages*, not the failure *value*
17:25 <Amirreza> stickies-v: Yes, thanks.
17:25 <larryruane_> one could say that `tuple` is less convenient than if there was built-in support, but it's probably not very common, so best to keep it simple
17:25 <furszy> :stickies-v meaningful distinction to what exactly? not sure if I understood the question
17:26 <stickies-v> larryruane_: yeah exactly, std::tuple or the likes, or even a custom struct if we need something more complex
17:28 <pablomartin> but then has_value would mean that could have 1 or multiple...
17:28 <stickies-v> well a function could return successfully, but still provide feedback on some potentially dangerous operations/contexts through the warnings? but without distinguishing between errors and warnings, that would be difficult?
17:28 <furszy> not every function requires that.
17:29 <furszy> actually, most of the current util::Result usages don't requires it
17:29 <stickies-v> ah, no that's true
17:29 <aryan_> It should but with warnings being stored in `m_info`, it'll cause the bool to return false (unsuccessful) even if `m_info` has no errors. (sorry if it sounds like I'm harping on this bool)
17:31 <stickies-v> hmm no it wouldn't, aryan_ because `!m_info->failure` would be `true`
17:31 <stickies-v> (`operator bool() const { return !m_info || !m_info->failure; }`)
17:31 <aryan_> Ahhhh, yes, yes, yes. Sorry. I read bad.
17:32 <stickies-v> pablomartin: not sure what you mean with 1 or multiple?
17:32 <larryruane_> if a function accumulates some warnings... then encounters and error (or multiple errors), the warnings aren't reported too, correct?
17:32 <stickies-v> alright gonna move on to the next question already but feel free to keep discussing previous questions - we're async!
17:32 <stickies-v> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25721 states `BResult` had a less familiar interface than the well-known `std::optional`. Is that a good enough reason to change it? What other reason(s) do you see for this change?
17:33 <furszy> :larryruant I think that we should always have errors > warnings
17:33 <larryruane_> I would say it's a good enough reason, given that `BResult` is not already used by a lot of existing code (if it was, there would be an argument)
17:33 <larryruane_> furszy: yes i agree, just checking
17:33 <stickies-v> great question larryruane_ - to my understanding everything propagates, so I'd think warnings are kept?
17:34 <aryan_> +1 larry
17:35 <stickies-v> larryruane_: right, that's definitely an important argument - it would be harder case to make if we'd have to refactor tons of code. but do you see a "positive" argument as well, besides making it easier perhaps for developers because they already know the std::optional interface?
17:36 <larryruane_> stickies-v: "What other reason(s) do you see for this change?" ... PR 25721 says "The Result/Res/Obj naming was also not internally consistent." ... maybe that's another one?
17:36 <michaelfolkson> stickies-v: I would say....a less familiar interface on its own probably isn't a good enough reason to change it. But there are other stronger reasons (e.g. misleading BResult constructor, type compatibility from ##25721)
17:36 <larryruane_> (but I don't understand why those are not internally consistent)
17:37 <stickies-v> (I don't understand that internal inconsistency either haha)
17:37 <stickies-v> michaelfolkson: I mean there are definitely more arguments in favour of this PR! was just focusing on the std::optional interface here
17:38 <michaelfolkson> Ok sorry :)
17:39 <stickies-v> I think a good argument in favour of the std::optional interface that a lot of the functions (supposedly?) that could benefit from a util::Result instead currently return a std::optional. so by keeping the interface identical, there should be less code change when replaced
17:40 <larryruane_> i wonder if anyone considered https://github.com/TartanLlama/expected
17:41 <stickies-v> next one: what is a `union`? Why is `m_value` a `union` type when it holds just one member?
17:42 <larryruane_> `union` because the constructors / destructors don't automatically run
17:42 <Amirreza> I asked this question from the PR author, using union prevents calling the c-tor in the failure.
17:42 <larryruane_> have to admit i cheated on this one https://stackoverflow.com/questions/59066929/whats-the-purpose-of-using-a-union-with-only-one-member/59067394#59067394
17:42 <hernanmarino> a union is a structure for holding "one of many" value types.
17:42 <hernanmarino>  Using an union in this case avoids m_value getting constructor and destructor being called automatically, so that in case of failure m_value is never constructed.
17:43 <Amirreza> larryruane_, I cheated too :)
17:44 <stickies-v> larryruane_: Amirreza hernanmarino yeah exactly, feels like a sneaky workaround but does seem to do the trick!
17:44 <aryan_> > Using an union in this case avoids m_value getting constructor and destructor being called automatically, so that in case of failure m_value is never constructed.
17:44 <aryan_> This helps a lot in my understanding. Thank you!
17:44 <pablomartin> yeah, like @hernanmarino - it's also on a comment in the code: Uses anonymous union so success value is never
17:44 <pablomartin>  constructed in failure case.
17:44 <larryruane_> there's a difference between a simple `union` (which is what this is) and a `union class` right? 
17:45 <stickies-v> pablomartin: yeah well it used to not be a comment until Amirreza decided to front-run the review club haha. it's definitely something that should be in the code comments though!
17:45 <brunoerg> `m_value` is a union to hold only success value
17:46 <larryruane_> nevermind i guess it's always a class (I was thinking it was similar to enum versus enum class, those are different)
17:46 <stickies-v> larryruane_:  from what I understand a union is just a class type?
17:46 <brunoerg> so it wouldn't fit with another type
17:46 <larryruane_> stickies-v: +1
17:47 <stickies-v> brunoerg: yup, and because `Result` doesn't always hold an m_value (in failure case), we don't want to allocate memory to it if not necessary
17:47 <brunoerg> interesting
17:47 <furszy> well, in that case, why m_value is an union, while the error member don't?
17:48 <furszy> does a Result always holds an error?
17:50 <stickies-v> furszy: that's an excellent question, and I believe `ErrorInfo` achieves something similar by dynamically checking the type of F with `std::is_same<F, void>`?
17:50 <larryruane_> a `union` is similar to (but more basic than) a `std::variant` but the `variant` type keeps track of which variant an instance currently contains (whereas a `union` doesn't, that's up to you)
17:50 <stickies-v> hmm no that's not true
17:50 <sipa> std::is_same is a compile-time check, not a runtime one
17:50 <stickies-v> (my previous statement)
17:50 <stickies-v> yeah sorry
17:53 <stickies-v> second attempt: `m_info` is a std::unique_pointer and we allocate memory dynamically: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L214-L215
17:54 <stickies-v> but we'd still allocate memory for the failure type even if the ErrorInfo only contained errors and warnings I think? which perhaps could be improved?
17:54 <stickies-v> furszy: do you think that makes sense?
17:55 <stickies-v> moving on to the next one already: in `template <typename T, typename F> class ResultBase`, what do `T` and `F` represent conceptually?
17:55 <michaelfolkson> stickies-v: Confused, errors are associated with failures?
17:55 <stickies-v> (link: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L39-L40)
17:56 <furszy> > but we'd still allocate memory for the failure type even if the ErrorInfo only contained errors and warnings I think?
17:57 <larryruane_> `T` is the type of success return value, and `F` is the type for failure return values?
17:57 <furszy> hmm, we will always allocate memory for the error reason if it contains errors and warnings
17:57 <Amirreza> +1 larryruane_ 
17:59 <stickies-v> michaelfolkson: yeah, see the difference in constructors when Warning and Error is passed, Error triggers InitFailure, Warning doesn't: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/590bc615a3120a8f11712220546f9654058b82f0/src/util/result.h#L162-L173
18:00 <hernanmarino> I agree with larryruane_ 
18:00 <stickies-v> yes you're correct larryruane_ ! and everyone agreeing with him whoo
18:01 <stickies-v> alright that's a wrap for today, thanks everyone for showing up and participating!
18:01 <stickies-v> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
