---
layout: pr
date: 2022-11-23
title: "Bump unconfirmed ancestor transactions to target feerate"
pr: 26152
authors: [Xekyo]
components: ["wallet"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: 898ad9d590
---

## Notes

- The wallet *funds* a transaction by selecting inputs to cover its payment amount(s) and the fee
  at the user's target feerate. This process is known as [[coin selection]], which we have discussed in
previous review clubs [#22009](/22009), [#17526](/17526) and [#17331](/17331).

    - Notably, each candidate coin is considered using an "effective value," introduced in
      [PR #17331](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17331). This deducts the cost to spend
      this input at the target feerate from its `nValue`.

- Since [PR #7600](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/7600), the
  [`BlockAssembler`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/aeb395dcdbfe2b1a6c77ff218939a18afde3add9/src/node/miner.h#L164)
algorithm has used ancestor feerate, rather than individual feerate, to select transactions for
inclusion in blocks. This strategy also enables users to fee-bump transactions using [Child Pays for
Parent (CPFP)](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/cpfp/). We have discussed the `BlockAssembler`
implementation in a [previous review club meeting](/24538).

- On the flip side of CPFP, a transaction's "effective" feerate depends on the UTXOs used to fund
  it: if unconfirmed UTXOs are used, since the transaction cannot be mined without its ancestors,
its "effective" feerate may decrease. Even while not trying to boost an unconfirmed transaction
using CPFP, if the wallet funds a transaction using unconfirmed UTXOs with feerates lower than the
target feerate, it may underestimate the amount of fees to put on this transaction. This issue has
been an open problem for years; see
[#9645](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/9645),
[#9864](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/9864), and
[#15553](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/15553).

- Goal: when funding a transaction using unconfirmed inputs, in addition to funding the payment(s)
  and this transaction's fee, also include the fees necessary to bump those unconfirmed transactions
to the target feerate.

- One naive solution would be to select all the inputs, and then calculate the cost of bumping
  unconfirmed ancestors and add that to the fees. However, if the selected inputs cannot cover the
cost of ancestor fees, the selection process needs to be repeated; this strategy would (re)introduce
a looped coin selection algorithm and make changeless solutions much less common.

- Consider another solution which updates the "effective value" of a coin, reducing it by the fee
  necessary to bump its ancestor set to the target feerate: `effective_value = nValue -
cost_to_spend - max(0, target_feerate * ancestor_size - ancestor_fees)`. For example, if the target
feerate is 20sat/vB, the UTXO has type P2WPKH and value 100ksat, and transaction's ancestor fee and
vsize are 1200sat and 600vB respectively, the coin's effective value would be 100000sat -
(20sat/vB * 68vB) - (20sat/vB * 600vB - 1200sat) = 87840sat.

- However, this problem is much more complicated than simply using the ancestor size and fees of
  unconfirmed UTXOs:

    - Multiple UTXOs may come from the same transaction or share the same ancestry. We don't need to
      bump those transactions more than once.

    - An ancestor's feerate may be higher than the target feerate.

    - An ancestor may have a low feerate, but be already fee-bumped by another transaction in the
      mempool.

    - If the transaction replaces existing transactions in the mempool, one or multiple transactions
      may be evicted. After these evictions, some transactions may now need bumping, and others may
      no longer need bumping. For example, we may be replacing a previous CPFP child with an
      even higher feerate child.

- [PR #26152](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26152) adds `MiniMiner`, a "mini" version of
  the block assembly algorithm designed to calculate the cost to bump an unconfirmed UTXO to a
target feerate.  It uses `MiniMiner` to include the fees to bump any unconfirmed ancestors when
funding a transaction.

- `MiniMiner` operates on a limited set of mempool entries rather than the entire mempool, and does not care
about consensus rules such as block size and sigop limits. The limited set includes the "clusters"
of each unconfirmed transaction from which the wallet might spend a UTXO from. A *cluster* includes
all mempool entries "connected" to a transaction. This includes parents and children,
ancestors and descendants, as well as "siblings" (a transaction that shares a parent) and
"coparents," (a transaction that shares a child), etc.

- The PR adds a `CTxMemPool::CalculateCluster` function to calculate a set of transactions'
  clusters. It uses the epoch-based traversal strategy described in
[PR #17268](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17268) and first introduced in
[PR #17925](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17925).

- `MiniMiner` provides two functions: `CalculateBumpFees()` provides the bump fee for each UTXO
  independently, ignoring any cases where there are shared ancestries. This function is intended for
calculating effective values in `AvailableCoins`, when it is unknown exactly which coins might be
spent.  `CalculateTotalBumpFees()` provides the bump fee for a set of UTXOs to be spent together,
taking into consideration when UTXOs have shared ancestry. It is intended for calculating the final
fee to put on the transaction.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?

1. What issue does this PR solve?

1. In
   [`CalculateCluster`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/995107782a1a512811d54f7abf29249f351a7cbf#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522R1218),
what does a transaction's "cluster" consist of?

1. Why does the `MiniMiner` require an entire cluster? Why can't it just use the union of each
   transaction's ancestor sets?

1. We know that a transaction's individual feerate is not necessarily indicative of how a miner will
  prioritize it. That is, if transaction X and Y have feerates fX and fY, fX > fY doesn't
necessarily imply that X will be selected sooner than Y. If two independent mempool transactions X
and Y have *ancestor feerates* gX and gY where gX > gY, which of the following are possible? (Here,
"independent" means that their respective clusters have no overlapping transactions).

    - a. X is selected sooner than Y
    - b. X is selected later than Y

1. The `MiniMiner`
   [constructor](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/b669fd94f84e679d4549ef0abe1b0483e1406152/src/node/mini_miner.h#L94)
accepts a mempool reference and a list of outpoints the wallet might be interested in spending.
Given an outpoint, it may be one of four possible types:

    - a confirmed UTXO
    - a UTXO created by a mempool transaction and has not been spent yet
    - a UTXO created by a mempool transaction and has already been spent by another mempool
      transaction
    - a UTXO that does not exist in mempool or chainstate (perhaps not yet submitted to mempool)

   How does the `MiniMiner` constructor detect and handle each case?

1. `MiniMiner` builds a `descendant_set_by_txid` cache, but not an `ancestor_set_by_txid` cache.
   Instead, it
[calculates](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/b669fd94f84e679d4549ef0abe1b0483e1406152/src/node/mini_miner.cpp#L145-L161)
ancestor sets on the fly. Do you think this approach makes sense? Why or why not?

1. At a high level, describe how
   [`MiniMiner::CalculateBumpFees()`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/898ad9d5904f1b689d18d94f20d92500cf443758/src/node/mini_miner.cpp#L186) works. Why can't we just use the ancestor feerate of each transaction?

1. Can `CalculateBumpFees()` overestimate, underestimate, both, or neither? By how much?

1. What are the similarities and differences in implementation between
   [`CalculateBumpFees`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/898ad9d5904f1b689d18d94f20d92500cf443758/src/node/mini_miner.cpp#L186) and
   [`CalculateTotalBumpFees`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/898ad9d5904f1b689d18d94f20d92500cf443758/src/node/mini_miner.cpp#L222)?

1. One potential approach for constructing the block is to define a custom ancestor score comparator
   for `MockMempoolEntry` (or even just reuse
[`CompareTxMemPoolEntryByAncestorFee`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/aeb395dcdbfe2b1a6c77ff218939a18afde3add9/src/txmempool.h#L277) from txmempool like the `BlockAssembler`
[does](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/aeb395dcdbfe2b1a6c77ff218939a18afde3add9/src/node/miner.cpp#L347)),
and then iterate through a list of entries sorted by ancestor score. Why would this approach work for
`BlockAssembler` but not for `MiniMiner`?

1. This functionality is only used by the wallet. Instead of adding `CalculateBumpFees` to the [chain
   interface](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26152/commits/8b8bf19951c5877bd39a02a3e39ce246fadd3678),
should we just add it as a utility function in the wallet?

1. Describe the approach taken in the "Bump unconfirmed parent txs to target feerate"
   [commit](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26152/commits/ad8bffe548a2536f925e6911c7d50c1aaab1a59e).

1. What test cases are included in wallet\_spend\_unconfirmed.py added in the same
   [commit](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26152/commits/ad8bffe548a2536f925e6911c7d50c1aaab1a59e)?
Can you think of any other test cases to add?

1. Two coin selection results may require different fees for bumping ancestors. How does
   the wallet choose which one to use? (Hint: can you identify how bump fees come into play in
[`GetSelectionWaste()`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/898ad9d5904f1b689d18d94f20d92500cf443758/src/wallet/coinselection.cpp#L372))?

1. How does the PR handle spending unconfirmed UTXOs with overlapping ancestry? (Hint: what does the code
   [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/898ad9d5904f1b689d18d94f20d92500cf443758/src/wallet/spend.cpp#L584) do)?


## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <glozow> Hi everyone! Welcome to Bitcoin Core PR review club!
17:00 <kouloumos> hi!
17:00 <hernanmarino_> Hi Gloria !
17:00 <stickies-v> hi!
17:00 <ishaanam[m]> hi
17:00 <josie[m]> hi
17:00 <hernanmarino_> and everyone :)
17:00 <emzy> hi
17:00 <BlueMoon> Hello!
17:01 <glozow> hello friends! ^_^
17:01 <pablomartin> Hello!
17:01 <lightlike> Hi
17:01 <yashraj> hi
17:01 <brunoerg> hu
17:01 <glozow> We're looking at #26152 today, notes here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/26152
17:01 <LarryRuane> hi
17:01 <brunoerg> hi*
17:01 <glozow> Have y'all had a chance to look at the notes and/or review the PR? how about a y/n?
17:01 <b_101> hi all
17:02 <stickies-v> 0.5y - a lot to cover!
17:02 <LarryRuane> notes y, review 0.5y
17:02 <hernanmarino_> Just did a light reading of the notes and first questions a couple of hours ago, I will thoroughly revier the PR later 
17:02 <emzy> n
17:02 <ishaanam[m]> y, I looked at the notes, reviewed the wallet part of the pr
17:02 <pablomartin> y for the notes, pending review
17:02 <yashraj> y, notes
17:03 <glozow> yes there's a lot to cover, but hopefully interesting enough to keep us going
17:03 <b_101> y/n
17:03 <glozow> Let's start with the first question: What issue does this PR address?
17:03 <kouloumos> notes y, review 0.1y, didn't got out of the mempool rabbit hole yet
17:04 <hernanmarino_> It fixes an overestimation in the effective value of unconfirmed UTXOs by the fees necessary to bump their ancestor transactions. 
17:04 <glozow> Right, I presume the MiniMiner implementation will be the most difficult to review (?)
17:04 <LarryRuane> The Core wallet may construct a transaction with a lower fee than required by the requested feerate. This transaction won't be mined as quickly as expected (given the requested feerate).
17:04 <hernanmarino_> I quitted when I got to the MiniMiner :))
17:05 <LarryRuane> Positive feedback loop: The resulting larger number of unconfirmed UTXOs coin selection has available to it, the more likely it will choose these UTXOs, creating even more too-low fee unconfirmed transactions
17:05 <stickies-v> the wallet fee estimation doesn't take into account that it also has to pay for all unconfirmed ancestors with a lower feerate than the target
17:06 <glozow> LarryRuane: hernanmarino_:  stickies-v: yes, thank you!
17:06 <ishaanam[m]> Would it be correct to describe this PR as fixing an inconsistency between what a miner sees as our transaction's feerate vs what the wallet sees as the transaction's feerate?
17:07 <LarryRuane> That positive feedback loop idea came from https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/15553#issue-418076345 "This can contribute to long unconfirmed chains forming ..."
17:08 <LarryRuane> ishaanam[m]: +1 (IIUC)
17:08 <glozow> ishaanam[m]: yes, i definitely think so! CPFP has 2 sides to it: it lets us fee-bump tx ancestors, but also means we *must* pay for them. we've basically only implemented the former to do it intentionally
17:08 <stickies-v> that's interesting, I hadn't considered the feedback loop, thanks LarryRuane - makes sense!
17:09 <glozow> Before we jump in, would anybody like to give us an overview of the approach taken in this PR?
17:09 <Murch> LarryRuane: Not necessarily. We will only consider unconfirmed UTXOs in later backoff attempts on Coin Selection.
17:10 <LarryRuane> Murch: ah, thank you, that actually answers a question I was just about to ask: From notes: "Goal: when funding a transaction using unconfirmed inputs...also include the fees necessary to bump " -- Would this be a reason to avoid using unconfirmed outputs? 
17:10 <LarryRuane> So we do prioritize confirmed UTXOs in coin selection (IIUC)
17:10 <hernanmarino_> glozow : I think Murch will be able to answer that :D
17:11 <glozow> Yes, we already *only* try to use unconfirmed inputs to fund the transaction if we can't cover it using confirmed ones.
17:11 <Murch> In the first round of coin selection attempts, we only use UTXOs that have six confirmations on UTXOs received from external wallets, and one confirmation on UTXOs sent to ourselves.
17:11 <Murch> hernanmarino_: Sure, but that's not the point of it :D
17:11 <LarryRuane> glozow: Murch: also we only use _change_ outputs (change to ourselves)?
17:11 <hernanmarino_> :D
17:11 <guest> at a very high level, this PR tries to accurately determine the bump fee by organizing them into clusters and then passes them to the MiniMiner to see how the transactions would be ranked
17:12 <glozow> LarryRuane: here is the code Murch is referring to https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/38d06e1561013f4ca845fd5ba6ffcc64de67f9c0/src/wallet/spend.cpp#L617-L663
17:12 <stickies-v> we simulate the mining process to calculate how much we'd have to pay to bump up an outpoint's ancestor feerate to the target feerate, and use that to decrease an outpoint's effective value?
17:12 <Murch> LarryRuane: Correct, assuming that you haven't enabled “allowUnsafe”
17:13 <Murch> guest: That's not quite it. Consider what the wallet knows about its UTXOs and what information it might be missing
17:13 <LarryRuane> Murch: thanks, seems like one reason you would want to "allowUnsafe" is if you're making a refund transactions... someone sent you a payment, but now you want to give a refund, you SHOULD use that payment's output, or else the payment may get replaced and you've issued the refund!
17:13 <Murch> LarryRuane: Right, but in that case you will also explicitly pick a specific UTXO, in which case the automatic filtering of your UTXO pool does not apply
17:14 <LarryRuane> Murch: oh i see, that makes sense
17:14 <glozow> stickies-v: exactly. the first half of the PR implements a "bump fee" calculator. It's implemented using the same algorithm as the miner (we'll get to why that is later). The second half adds wallet functionality, deducting the bump fees from the effective values, and adding another mini miner function to calculate the total bump fees once the exact coins have been selected
17:14 <LarryRuane> "simulate the mining process" -- but without the Pow haha
17:15 <LarryRuane> the code in this PR is really interesting, it must have been a blast to write, @murch!
17:15 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: yeah which is why I actually proposed calling it `MiniBlockAssembler` instead of `MiniMiner` hah but now I'm phrasing it like that myself
17:15 <glozow> LarryRuane: Ah right good call - psa when we refer to the "mining algorithm" here we're talking about the block template creation algorithm. The other, more famous algorithm, is not very interesting.
17:15 <LarryRuane> stickies-v: good point!
17:16 <glozow> *not very interesting in this context
17:16 <LarryRuane> hey if not too much sidetracking, isn't the getblocktemplate RPC out of favor these days?
17:16 <LarryRuane> thought i'd read that somewhere
17:17 <glozow> I'll move on to the implementation questions. 
17:17 <glozow> In `CalculateCluster`, what does a transaction’s “cluster” consist of? (code here: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/995107782a1a512811d54f7abf29249f351a7cbf#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522R1218)
17:17 <LarryRuane> given a set (vector) of transactions, return deduped vector of all connected transactions (ancestors and decendants recursively)
17:17 <hernanmarino_> It consists of all in-mempool ancestors of a set of transactions not already in the mempool (considering ancestor and descendant limits)
17:17 <LarryRuane> the list won't include the original transactions, except those that are connected to other transactions in the cluster
17:19 <LarryRuane> can i ask a general mempool question (feel free to ignore): why does so much of the code use `mapTx` iterators, rather than just some kind of direct reference?
17:19 <Murch> LarryRuane: Thanks, it is a very interesting project. A lot of the code was created by glozow, and we also had a lot of input from achow101
17:20 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: "except those that are connected to other transactions in the cluster" the transactions specified in `txids` can never be included in the cluster, I think
17:21 <stickies-v> because in the beginning of the function we visit them all with `for (const auto& it : cluster) { visited(it); }`
17:21 <stickies-v> oh wait. it's opposite. they're always included haha. whoops
17:21 <glozow> Er, I'm pretty sure the cluster includes those specified in `txids`? in the beginning we also initialize `cluster{GetIterVec(txids)}`
17:21 <LarryRuane> stickies-v: yes but let's say we're spending from two outputs of the same ancestor transaction? would that do it?
17:22 <Murch> Mh, maybe I'm misunderstanding you, but the cluster is the set of all transactions that are either ancestors or descendants to any other transactions in the cluster
17:22 <josibake> stickies-v: this was something i was a little fuzzy on .. they are already in the cluster and then we visit all of them so that they don't get added again?
17:22 <josibake> at least from my understanding
17:22 <josibake> but we initialize cluster from the list of txids and we don't remove anything, so the original txids would also be in the cluster
17:22 <LarryRuane> glozow: you're right, thanks, i had missed that
17:23 <stickies-v> yep josibake glozow  you're right
17:23 <glozow> Murch: you are correct. LarryRuane and hernanmarino_'s answers were part of the way there so I was waiting for more answers :P
17:23 <glozow> Yes, a cluster is every single "connected" transaction. So a "sibling" i.e. a child of your parent, who is neither your ancestor nor your descendant, would be part of your cluster.
17:24 <Murch> It's the maximal strongly connected component of the initial transactions
17:24 <LarryRuane> `CalculateCluster()` is really interesting, I had written python code months ago that does almost exactly the same thing (while trying to understand package relay)
17:25 <josibake> something that occurred to me, what happens if a list of txids is passed to calculate cluster where the txids themselves create distinct clusters?
17:25 <lightlike> did you introduce the MiniMiner because adjusting the actual miner for this use case would be too complicated? I think the algorithm is kind of implemented twice now (even with some adjustments).
17:25 <josibake> or perhaps a better question, who is deciding which txids to pass to CalculateCluster? the wallet?
17:25 <LarryRuane> josibake: I think that's perfectly okay (and normal), you just get the union
17:26 <LarryRuane> lightlike: is the actual miner conditionally compiled in? (i don't recall)
17:27 <Murch> Well, in that case, the approach of this PR is owed that the wallet doesn't know about unconfirmed transactions unless they pertain to itself. So when we spend unconfirmed UTXOs we must get more information from the mempool. It turned out that we were basically recreating block building on the wallet side then to cover all of the possible constellations of transaction relations, so we instead used the existing data structures in mempool to extract
17:27 <Murch> only the result of the graph analysis.
17:27 <Murch> josibake: The wallet asks for all of the transactions that created unconfirmed UTXOs in its pool
17:28 <hernanmarino_> Murch : that's interesting 
17:28 <glozow> lightlike: good question, there's a few reasons: We only need to operate on a cluster and not the entire mempool + don't need to apply any of the checks that `BlockAssembler` does. I also got a suggestion to do this without holding the mempool lock. We'd also need to change the block assembler to be tracking bump fees rather than building the block template - the amount of refactoring necessary was equivalent to rewriting.
17:28 <josibake> Murch: ah, got it! that makes more sense
17:29 <glozow> I can understand why the duplication of the algo could be considered an inferior approach, feedback welcome of course
17:29 <Murch> Also, we need to stop assembling the block at a specific feerate which is a different mechanism than running out of space
17:30 <glozow> Yes, though I must admit that the `BlockAssembler::blockMinFeeRate` also achieves this
17:31 <josibake> glozow: i think the reasons specified make a lot of sense. if anything, sounds like an opportunity to pull the algo out into it's own function and have both MiniMiner and and BlockAssembler call it? but haven't looked at block assembler to know if that's feasible/sane
17:31 <glozow> it's a good way to compare the algos we can fuzz them pretty easily given they have this in common
17:31 <lightlike> glozow: ah, thanks. Don't know the BlockAssembler enough to have an opinion, just wanted to understand the reasons.
17:31 <LarryRuane> josibake: I like that idea (pull the common code, if there's a significant amount of it) out into a separate function or class, then call from both places
17:32 <LarryRuane> then that function can be unit-tested too very easily
17:33 <glozow> josibake: yeah, considered that too, but a "general algorithm" is pretty much the only thing they have in common at this point. For instance, `BlockAssembler` builds a `mapModifiedTx` to "make changes" to mapTx, while `MiniMiner` operates directly on copies of the mempool entries. One builds a block template and the other builds a map of outpoint to bumpfee.
17:34 <LarryRuane> glozow: seems like you made a good engineering decision
17:35 <LarryRuane> (er, you and murch I guess)
17:35 <josibake> regarding CalcCluster (and sorry if this was asked already, had some issues with my irc client), but why the `GetIterVec` function?
17:36 <LarryRuane> josibake: you mean why not make it inline?
17:36 <glozow> josibake: good question, brings us to the Epoch Mempool topic. A vector is much smaller than a set. we have a wider effort to switch, though it's taken years. I felt that new code should try to use epochs and vectors instead of setEntries
17:36 <glozow> oh! is it LarryRuane's question?
17:37 <LarryRuane> glozow: oh that's good to know! wasn't aware of that effort
17:38 <LarryRuane> epochs == really cool idea
17:38 <josibake> glozow: thanks, that makes more sense. i think i need to dig in more as to what a txiter is before i fully grok whats going on
17:38 <josibake> LarryRuane: not really concerned about inline or not, just curious why we were starting with a list of txids and then converting it to a vec of txiter's
17:38 <glozow> haha yes `txiter` is an alias for a very very long type
17:39 <glozow> txiter def: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/38d06e1561013f4ca845fd5ba6ffcc64de67f9c0/src/txmempool.h#L406
17:39 <glozow> indexed_transaction_set: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/38d06e1561013f4ca845fd5ba6ffcc64de67f9c0/src/txmempool.h#L374
17:39 <josibake> im guessing txiters are specific to epochs then? (also , read a little on the epoch pr's as background, very cool idea)
17:40 <glozow> Ah no, txiters are just mapTx iterators. The entry's `m_epoch` can change without the txiter changing
17:40 <glozow> Continuing with the CalculateCluster commit. A transaction's cluster is both necessary and sufficient for calculating its bump fees. Let's show "sufficient" first: why do we only need the cluster and not the whole mempool to calculate what a transaction's mining "priority" will be?
17:41 <glozow> And why does the `MiniMiner` require an entire cluster? Why can’t it just use the union of each transaction’s ancestor sets?
17:41 <pablomartin> josibake: could you pls share that epoch pr?
17:42 <glozow> Epoch Mempool: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17925 and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17268
17:42 <glozow> (would people be interested in an epoch mempool review club?
17:42 <LarryRuane> first question, I don't think we care what the mining priority is, just that this newly-created tx has the requested feerate
17:42 <glozow> )
17:42 <pablomartin> glozow: as we discussed before, we need descendant and even siblings... ?
17:42 <Murch> Hint: The test-cases might provide some ideas
17:42 <lightlike> because some of the ancestors may already have been paid for by some of their other descendants - so we don't have to do it with our transaction.
17:42 <josibake> re: sufficient, a transactions mining priority is determined by it's ancestor fee, right? so we dont need to know anything about a tx except it's full ancestory
17:42 <stickies-v> josibake: I'll try and explain my understanding briefly. CTxMemPoolEntry wraps a CTransaction and adds some mempool-specific stats to it. CTXMemPool stores CTxMemPoolEntry objects in a boost multi-index (`mapTx`) so we can quickly query the mempool in different ways. `txiter` is a shorthand for boost iterators that point to CTxMemPoolEntry objects in `mapTx`
17:43 <stickies-v> We use `txiter` for internal consistency (e.g. ensuring multiindex stays up to date, and that entries are still in mempool). I hope my explanation didn't contain too many inaccuraries - again, just my understanding!
17:43 <LarryRuane> lightlike: +1, Because an ancestor (A) may have a CPFP child that is already increasing A's effective feerate, so we don't need to "help" A
17:43 <Murch> pablomartin: Why though? What mistake might we make if we don't consider them?
17:43 <josibake> well, i take that back. because the cluster includes more than strictly the ancestory for a single tx
17:44 <Murch> josibake: Njet. What if your sibling has bumped the parent already to a higher package feerate than what you're aiming for?
17:44 <josibake> stickies-v: thanks, that helps!
17:44 <glozow> pablomartin: lightlike: yes exactly. to find out how much to bump, we need to know whether something is already bumped.
17:44 <Murch> There is also another issue that hasn't been mentioned yet
17:44 <Murch> Or only indirectly, I guess
17:45 <glozow> and josibake: yes that's the general idea. we don't need anything that cannot impact these transactions during block assembly
17:45 <LarryRuane> Murch: a little more context please? issue with not consideringly only ancestors?
17:46 <Murch> You can't just sum up all ancestors and take their summed up fee and weight, because some of the ancestors might have a higher effective feerate than what you're aiming for by themselves and will not actually be part of your package
17:46 — lightlike we just have to make sure that we don't pay for something that has low-fee descendants (that does the opposite of bumping them). But I guess the BlockAssembly algorithm takes care of that?
17:46 <Murch> Children pay for parents, but parents cannot pay for children
17:47 <LarryRuane> that's mean ... oh i forgot to mention at the start of the meeting, in the notes, the effective_value expression should use max, not min (correct?)
17:47 <pablomartin> Murch: true, I agree (only children pay for parents -> direction)
17:47 <Murch> So, if your grandparent tx has a higher feerate, you may only need to bump the parent, but if you had summed up the two, you would underestimate the bump fee
17:47 <ishaanam[m]> LarryRuane: yes
17:47 <glozow> LarryRuane: yes, its should be max. ishaanam also pointed this out to me. I'll fix it when I add the logs later today. Thanks you both for catching!
17:48 <pablomartin> Murch: so you need to check if sibling were already bumping common parents...
17:48 <lightlike> sure - but the low-fee children would be included in the Cluster at first, and then discarded later, right?
17:48 <Murch> however, if your parent tx has a higher feerate than what you're aiming for, it might still have a lower ancestor feerate, because it's bumping a grandparent.—In that case, you do have to bump both the parent and grandparent
17:49 <LarryRuane> Murch: that's mind-bending! cool tho
17:50 <LarryRuane> and just to be clear.. when we say "bump" we just mean reduce the EV of the output that we're considering spending
17:50 <Murch> So, you can't just skip over txs that have a higher individual feerate, but you can also not just take their summed up fees and weights. You actually have to traverse the cluster in order to find out which ancestors, descendants and cousins are relevant
17:50 <glozow> Yes, so there really isn't a quick and easy way of calculating the bump fees just by looking at aggregate feerates etc. running the mining algorithm on the cluster is the easiest way imo, even if it seems like a lot
17:51 <Murch> LarryRuane: Yes, reduce the effective value of the UTXO in order to pay a higher fee when it's used that will go towards elevating ancestors to the target feerate
17:52 <Murch> lightlike: Yeah, we first collect siblings, niblings, cousins, etc., but if they do not bump some of the shared ancestry, we can disregard them for the bumpfee calculation
17:52 <Murch> pablomartin: Yep!
17:53 <glozow> To hammer this home:  If two mempool transactions X and Y have ancestor feerates gX and gY where gX > gY, which of the following are possible?
17:53 <glozow>     (a) X is selected sooner than Y
17:53 <glozow>     (b) X is selected later than Y
17:53 <LarryRuane> sorry I didn't really look yet, but are there tests, I could imagine setting up these weird graphs and then making sure the algorithm does the right thing (right as determined manually)
17:53 <LarryRuane> glozow: Both are possible! (a) is obvious, but (b) can happen if some of Y's ancestors have (other) decendants that are high feerate
17:54 <LarryRuane> this would, in effect, "remove" those low-feerate ancestors from Y's ancestor set, which may then increase Y's ancestor feerate
17:54 <Murch> LarryRuane: I've created a bunch of graphs that will exhibit these sort of issues for the functional tests. I'm not 100% sure that they're exhaustive yet, though
17:54 <glozow> LarryRuane: bingo! both are possible!
17:54 <glozow> To all: We're running out of time and have just looked at the concept + approach today, and didn't really get into wallet. Would you all be interested in continuing with this PR next week? The questions will be the same, but we'll have more time to dive into implementation and tests :)
17:55 <pablomartin> glozow: sure
17:55 <LarryRuane> glozow: +1 yes!
17:55 <josibake> definitely interested in continuing next week
17:55 <Murch> ishaanam: I wrote the test with unconfirmed and confirmed UTXOs you proposed, but I've not finished my update  of the PR yet
17:55 <josibake> glozow: also, yes to having a epoch review club in the future
17:55 <ishaanam[m]> glozow: yes
17:55 <LarryRuane> josibake: +1
17:55 <stickies-v> (to everyone voting yes: thanks for kicking me out of  (hosting) job. names are noted)
17:55 <d33r_gee> glozow +1
17:55 <hernanmarino_> glozow : yes please
17:56 <stickies-v> but yes, I would also like to continue this PR next week - very interesting!
17:56 <Murch> Cool
17:56 <glozow> Great :) let's do one more question and then to be continued - hahaha sorry stickies-v
17:56 <LarryRuane> josebake: i'm not sure epoch is itself enough for an entire review club...
17:56 <josibake> stickies-v:  >:D
17:56 <Murch> Also looking forward to the further questions and comments your review will unearth
17:56 <glozow> Can `CalculateBumpFees()` overestimate, underestimate, both, or neither? By how much?
17:57 <ishaanam[m]> Murch: great!
17:58 <josibake> my guess is overestimate
17:59 <glozow> josibake: yes!
17:59 <glozow> Next week, we'll get to why that is, and how the PR resolves it :)
17:59 <ishaanam[m]> CalculateBumpFees can overestimate since it doesn't take into account two sibling transactions both being selected (since the calculation is done independently)
17:59 <Murch> Methinks that for an individual UTXO the result of CalculateBumpFees() should be accurate regarding the available information. But it can overestimate, if two UTXOs have overlapping ancestries and are spent together. It can underestimate if there is a later sibling transaction that bumps an ancestor harder than our own, but that's not really a mistake.
17:59 <Murch> err.
18:00 <Murch> The latter is also an overestimate
18:00 <pablomartin> glozow: yes pls
18:00 <josibake> Murch: in the case of a later sibling, i think that would also be an overestimate?
18:00 <glozow> ishaanam[m]: yep exactly, if any UTXOs have overlapping ancestors, they'll both count
18:00 <hernanmarino_> I have to go, thank you all for everything, see you next week !
18:00 <Murch> Anyway, what I wanted to get at was that more transactions published after ours might take precedence and outdate our prior estimate 
18:00 <glozow> (exercise for the attendees: can it *ever* underestimate?)
18:00 <josibake> glozow: thanks for hosting! great questions on the PR, too
18:01 <glozow> Thanks everyone for a wonderful session! See you next week!
18:01 <glozow> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
