---
layout: pr
date: 2022-01-05
title: "Allow negative effective value inputs when subtracting fee from outputs"
pr: 23534
authors: [achow101]
components: ["wallet"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: a26a64c63d
---

## Notes

* The [`fundrawtransaction`
  RPC](https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/rpc/fundrawtransaction.html) allows users to pass in
  a transaction with outputs filled in, and the wallet "funds" the payment and transaction fees by
  selecting UTXOs from the wallet's UTXO pool to spend in the transaction's inputs. The process of
  selecting which UTXOs to use is known as *Coin Selection*.

  - While transaction outputs have an amount,
    [`nValue`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/d69af93223c4008c3255f7e4848ff05d78c514fa/src/primitives/transaction.h#L131),
    each added input increases the fee required to keep the transaction at a given feerate. As such, the
    *effective value* (`nValue` reduced by the UTXO’s input size multiplied by the given feerate) is
    used during coin selection instead.

  - We have discussed Coin Selection and effective values in a [previous review club](/17331).

  - The `subtractFeeFromOutputs` argument in `fundrawtransaction` causes the payment amounts in
    the transaction to be reduced by the fee amount. We have discussed the behavior around subtracting
    fee from recipients in a [previous review club](/22155).

* [PR #23534](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/23534) changes coin selection behavior to
  allow UTXOs with negative effective values to be selected when `subtractFeeFromOutputs` is on.

## Questions

### Conceptual Questions

1. Did you review the PR? What was your review approach?

2. What does the `subtractFeeFromOutputs` argument do in `fundrawtransaction`; how do you use it?
   Why might a user opt to subtract fees from outputs?

3. What does it mean for a coin to have *negative effective value*? Why does it usually *not* make
   sense to select negative effective value UTXOs?

4. What does this PR do? What are the advantages of disadvantages of its changes?

5. Since this is a wallet PR: could this change cause users to pay extreme fees, end up with dust
   outputs, or leak privacy? Would this be confusing to you as a user if you are using the default settings?

### Implementation Questions

6. What does the [first
   commit](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/227803cb95d3170613deddea67720879873f0754),
*set change fee only if not subtracting fee from outputs*, do? Does it change behavior?

7. How does `AttemptSelection()` know that the user wants to subtract fees from recipient outputs?
   (Trace the `fundrawtransaction` call; how does it eventually end up calling
   `AttemptSelection()`)?

8. What is the type of `bnb_result` declared
   [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/89d1d6ff4c79b31f4b6849c7ef906833cfd49d85#diff-6e06b309cd494ef5da4e78aa0929a980767edd12342137f268b9219167064d13R410)
   (and `srd_result` a few lines below)? How does it resolve as a boolean expression in the `if`
   statement?

      7a. (Bonus) Why might we use `auto` instead of declaring the type explicitly here?

      7b. (Bonus 2) Can you find other examples of this calling pattern in the codebase?

9. Why does the test need to call `generate`
   [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/a26a64c63dd8d55d0ac972f5420f5dd27e7f53d8#diff-729d780cd34193bdca2c44e9765fb47063bfbf88ba50e0864dad12d747033995R1170)?

10. Can you think of any logic that isn't tested by the functional test added in this PR? Do you
    have any suggestions to better test the changes added in this PR?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <glozow> Happy New Year! Welcome to PR review club!
17:00 <b10c__> hi (lurking today)
17:00 <glozow> We're looking at PR #23534 today, notes and questions in the usual place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/23534
17:00 <larryruane> hi
17:00 <lightlike> hi
17:00 <kouloumos> hi
17:00 <tarun> hi
17:00 <kalpa> hi
17:00 <erik> hi
17:00 <kodyl> yo
17:00 <glozow> Feel free to say hi, and let us know if it's your first time
17:01 <svav> Hi
17:01 <kalpa> first time for me
17:01 <rahim> hi (lurking), first time!
17:01 <turkycat> hi, first time. will observe
17:01 <janoside> Hi, first time
17:01 <erik> It's my first time, here
17:01 <stickies-v> hiya
17:01 <kodyl> first time (lurking)
17:01 <Julianmrodri> hi, first time
17:01 <Loris> hi, first time :)
17:01 <glozow> kalpa: rahim: turkycat: janoside: erik: kodyl: Julianmrodri: Loris: Welcome!
17:01 <tim14> first time (lurking)
17:01 <glozow> wow so many first-timers :D
17:01 <fqxjkdtbwnm5> Hi, first time :-)
17:01 <turkycat> just discovered via twitter
17:01 <glozow> Quick poll: have you reviewed the PR or read the notes? y/n?
17:02 <kodyl> y
17:02 <janoside> y
17:02 <rahim> n
17:02 <Loris> n
17:02 <turkycat> y and y
17:02 <kalpa> nn
17:02 <michaelfolkson> hi
17:02 <stickies-v> 0.5y, glossed over it
17:02 <erik> y
17:02 <kouloumos> n
17:02 <glozow> For those of you who reviewed, what was your review approach?
17:02 <tarun> y
17:02 <svav> y read the notes
17:03 <glozow> tim14: fqxjkdtbwnm5: Welcome as well
17:03 <tarun> read the notes reviewed the questions
17:03 <sipa> Looks correct to me.
17:03 <glozow> awesome, let's dive into the questions
17:03 <glozow> What does the `subtractFeeFromOutputs` argument do in fundrawtransaction; how do you use it? Why might a user opt to subtract fees from outputs?
17:04 <kouloumos> It subtracts the fee from the outputs. You specify from which outputs you want that fee to be subtracted and it will be equally deducted from the amount of each one.
17:04 <glozow> kouloumos: yes!
17:05 <erik> It subtracts the fee from the sending amount. It's useful for self transfers, like during wallet migration
17:05 <glozow> Can anyone tell us a use case for this?
17:05 <willcl_ark> hi
17:05 <stickies-v> It is especially useful when sweeping a wallet, because you don't know how much fees you'll have to pay before iterating over all the inputs
17:05 <glozow> erik: right! since the payment amount will be reduced, we'd imagine that you wouldn't use this to pay a merchant for example
17:06 <glozow> stickies-v: yes! what does "sweeping a wallet" mean?
17:06 <brunoerg> hi
17:07 <stickies-v> Sending all your UTXOs to one or multiple new addresses. Breaking the piggy bank and putting everything in a shiny new one :)
17:07 <glozow> stickies-v: perfect
17:08 <glozow> next question: What does it mean for a coin to have negative effective value? Why does it usually not make sense to select negative effective value UTXOs?
17:08 <larryruane> the fee increase that would be required to include that input is greater than the value of the input
17:09 <kalpa> Do negative effective value UTXOs even exist?
17:09 <glozow> larryruane: correct
17:09 <brunoerg> the cost to move this coin is greater than its value?
17:09 <glozow> kalpa: yes they do! it also depends on the feerate at which you're trying to construct this transaction
17:09 <glozow> perhaps it would be helpful for someone to tell us what effective value means :)
17:09 <glozow> brunoerg: correct
17:09 <turkycat> utxo value - fee per utxo
17:09 <kalpa> oh ok understood
17:10 <stickies-v> effective value is the nValue of the UTXO minus (tx size * current feerate)
17:11 <callebtc> what's a typical threshold value for a too-small utxo (i.e. negative effective value)?
17:11 <glozow> stickies-v: yep exactly
17:11 <glozow> callebtc: good question, i think it'd be a few hundred - a few thousand sats
17:13 <glozow> Alright next question: What does this PR do? What are the advantages of disadvantages of its changes?
17:13 <stickies-v> a 2-input 2-output p2wpkh tx is 208.5 vbytes, at a feerate of 5 sats/vbyte you'd get roughly 1000sats?
17:13 <callebtc> btw, if I understand correctly, the problem would also propagate to the next utxo: if your effective value is just marginally positive, the output (the input of the next tx) could then have a negative effective value, correct?
17:14 <larryruane> stickies-v: "tx size * current feerate" - is it tx size or input size?
17:14 <glozow> callebtc: hm, i don't think anything would propagate to the next utxo. the problem here is, when we spend this output in our transaction (i.e. we create an input that refers to this UTXO), the size of the input * feerate is more than the UTXO's nValue
17:14 yeah i just realized i've been confusing the two. that should be input size, so my previous example is off too
17:15 <glozow> larryruane: stickies-v: oh you're right, i didn't look closely enough. yes it's the size of the input.
17:16 <glozow> yeah so an input to spend a p2wpkh is ~68vB, and at 5sat/vB that's about 340 sats
17:18 <George[m]1> What’s very strange to me is that I joined IRC as the ‘zenlo’ user which shows up here.
17:18 <glozow> are we okay to move on to the next question?
17:18 <erik> Yes
17:19 <brunoerg> y
17:19 <glozow> okay: what does this PR do?
17:19 <callebtc> glozow: > What does this PR do? I think it allows one to spend negative EV utxo's which might be desirable if the user wants to, for example, clear out the entire wallet.
17:20 <kalpa> it allows us to consolidate small UTXO values?
17:20 <glozow> callebtc: yes, it allows us to include the negative effective value UTXOs in a transaction when `subtractFeeFromOutputs` is on
17:20 <glozow> kalpa: yes that's what the effect is!
17:20 <callebtc> Understood! Can I ask, why it wasn't possible in the first place?
17:21 <glozow> stickies-v mentioned sweeping wallets, so let's consider an alternative approach. Why don't we just have a `sweepwallet` RPC?
17:22 <glozow> callebtc: because selecting negative effective value inputs would mean you're not getting closer to funding your payment amount, just throwing away extra money to fees
17:22 <stickies-v> I don't think it's a very common use case, so maybe no need to clutter the RPC with an extra method when the fundrawtransaction method can already get the job done?
17:23 <lightlike> why is it desirable to sweep the wallet when we are actually donating fees to the miners? why not just forget about these utxos instead and move only those coins with a positive effective value?
17:24 <kalpa> well fundrawtransaction is the method to create a transaction so it wouldn't make sense to create another one
17:24 <brunoerg> lightlike: privacy?
17:24 <stickies-v> lightlike yeah that's my number one mystery with this entire PR, not sure why you wouldn't just leave the negative EVs behind
17:24 <m011> I also think fundrawtransaction method gets the job done. This only needs a parameter that use the wallet balance instead of specifying a value.
17:24 <glozow> lightlike: good question. i guess that could make sense to the user, but then we're cluttering the UTXO set.
17:24 <achow101> stickies-v: alternatively, why should we clutter all of the coin selection code with subtractFeeFromOutputs handling when a sweep function would be fairly simple to create.
17:24 <willcl_ark> Sometimes you just wanna use up all UTXOs
17:25 <rahim> lightlike: couldn't a negative effective value input become a "positive" effective value one eventually, assuming price increases?
17:25 <larryruane> basic question: with this sweeping use-case, the user *wants* to spend negative-effective-value UTXOs, even though doing that is uneconomical? If so, I don't see why that's desired
17:25 <lightlike> brunoerg: wouldn't the new solution be actually worse to privacy than just forgetting about the utxos, because it allows third partieds to connects more utxos?
17:25 <willcl_ark> You're also altruistically reducing the UTXO set size
17:25 <glozow> achow101: +1, an extra RPC method is better than complicating the coin selection logic imo
17:25 <stickies-v> achow101 excellent point, I don't have any counterpoints haha
17:26 <larryruane> (lightlike +1 you beat me to it on that question)
17:26 <kalpa> if btc goes to a million dollars it could make sense to sweep all dust outputs into one now
17:26 <glozow> rahim: good point, if you're able to create very low feerate transactions in the future, they might be positive effective value
17:26 <glozow> but this has nothing to do with the exchange rate with USD
17:27 <fqxjkdtbwnm5> @rahim, I do not think so, because everything written above is in the "unit" sats and correct independent of USD price
17:27 <brunoerg> lightlike: hmmmm, good point. 
17:27 <achow101> there is some philosophical questions around whether sweeping should ignore negative ev utxos. imo users would expect that sweeping results in their wallet balance becoming 0, but not spending negative ev utxos means that there will be a non-zero remaining balance
17:27 <larryruane> kalpa: I'm not sure the btc price matters, because wouldnt everything (fees, etc.) scale linearly?
17:28 <rahim> gotcha; fees are calculated from the tx size and independent of price, right?
17:28 <erik> rahim: feerate is calculated in sats
17:28 <callebtc> Is there a technical reason why there isn't a `sweepwallet` RPC (excluding complexity, bloat, ugliness, etc)?
17:28 <glozow> larryruane: if i'm sweeping a wallet, i'll probably throw away my keys/backups, so i'd prefer not to leave anything behind. i'd also feel like i'm dumping plastic bags into the ocean, just not very eco-friendly to keep those in the UTXO set
17:29 <larryruane> glozow: +1
17:29 <constantin21> achow101: I think it comes down to donating dust to miners or "deflating" bitcoin supply?
17:29 <achow101> callebtc: not in particular
17:30 <glozow> okay we're halfway through the hour so i'll throw out the final conceptual question: Since this is a wallet PR, could this change cause users to pay extreme fees, end up with dust outputs, or leak privacy? Would this be confusing to you as a user if you are using the default settings?
17:30 <svav> Can someone give a simple explanation as to why this PR was felt necessary? If fees make it uneconomical to spend a particular UTXO, why would you ever bother spending it? What is the reason for this existence of this PR? X)
17:30 <glozow> (I included these in the notes as examples of what you might want to ask yourself when reviewing the PR)
17:31 <callebtc> I think it would be helpful to try to find an answer to the "why does this PR even exist?" questions
17:31 <achow101> svav: it is a bug fix for a reported bug where someone was sweeping their entire wallet but got an insufficient funds error. the root cause was found to be that their wallet contained negative ev utxos.
17:32 <glozow> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/23026
17:32 <achow101> however they were able to sweep with an older version of the software, so this is technically a regression
17:32 <kalpa> consolidating your UTXOs could be a privacy leak but that also happens with other coin selection algorithms
17:32 <constantin21> svav : It enables donating unobtainable dust to miners
17:33 <janoside> glozow: Pay extreme fees: no (changes seem independent of fee rate). End up with dust outputs: no (this will destroy dust outputs). Leak privacy: yes, possibly (history of the dust outputs can now be linked to the spend).
17:33 <glozow> kalpa: i don't think that's caused by this PR, but a side effect of consolidation.
17:33 <kalpa> glozow, of course
17:34 <glozow> janoside: same thing, this does not worsen the privacy of our coin selection implementation, it's always been the case that consolidating UTXOs links them to the same wallet
17:36 <glozow> any further questions about the concept? this discussion has been very lively \o/
17:36 <svav> If a user was sweeping their wallet, would they currently be adding each input manually?
17:36 <Murch> achow101: that sounds more like an issue of the wallet not distinguishing the balance and spendable balance
17:37 <kalpa> glozow, so this PR does not affect the gui wallet functionality correct?
17:37 <achow101> Murch: the spendable balance depends on the feerate though, and having a balance that constantly changes doesn't sound like good UX
17:37 <lightlike> but I think it does worsen the privacy of that particular transaction - using less utxos (which are not necessary/economical)  should improve privacy.
17:37 <m011> Correct. This PR does not affect the GUI
17:38 <svav> Apart from sweeping a wallet, are there any other production circumstances where a coin being able to have a negative effective value would be useful/needed?
17:38 <glozow> kalpa: depends on what you mean. the gui wallet is the same as the wallet, so no. but nothing should change in the gui itself, so yes.
17:38 <glozow> lightlike: ah that is a good point
17:39 <kalpa> glozow, but the gui wallet does not use the fundrawtransaction RPC or does it? or is it supposed to do so in the future?
17:39 <Murch> achow101: Sure, but in the context of building a transaction with a specific feerate, the spendable balance would be stable.
17:40 <achow101> kalpa: the gui, fundrwatransaction, and the send* functions, etc. all end up using the same CreateTransaction function which contains all of the coin selection logic
17:42 <callebtc> does anyone know how many utxo's out there have negative EV?
17:42 <sipa> that depends on the feerate
17:42 <callebtc> And how many sats they effectively lock away?
17:42 <larryruane> just so everyone's aware, a sophisticated user can also choose the inputs (createrawtransaction) to have complete control (not use the built-in coin selection algorithms)
17:43 <glozow> svav: i can't think of any other use cases, so I'm a proponent of adding a `sweepwallet` RPC that sweeps all UTXOs. i think if this is the expected behavior, users should be able to say they specifically want to sweep
17:43 <callebtc> sipa: isn't a lower bound 1sat/vbyte anyway?
17:43 <sipa> in practice yes
17:44 <sipa> But the answer to the question "how many utxos have negative EV" isn't well defined - it depends on the feerate the spender wants to use.
17:44 <glozow> maybe one day we can lower the min relay feerate
17:44 — glozow ducks
17:44 <callebtc> I see. I'll rephrase: how many UTXO's have negative EV at 1sat/vB fee rate?
17:44 <sipa> Probably very little, because the dust rule prevents such UTXOs from being created.
17:45 <m011> I think adding something like "max"parameter to fundrwatransaction or send RPC can be a better approach. 
17:45 <callebtc> I guess I'd have to ask the on chain metrics people...
17:45 <callebtc> sipa: I see
17:45 <stickies-v> sipa but the dust rule is policy right, so non-core clients may not adhere to that? and I don't think the dust policy has always been in place?
17:46 <sipa> Sure, but the minrelayfee of 1 sat/vbyte is also policy.
17:47 <stickies-v> ah, right
17:47 <glozow> stickies-v: non-core clients would be silly not to adhere to policy, since it would make their mempool very unreliable
17:47 <erik> Maybe a few very old utxos from minrelayfee times
17:48 <erik> But may be minor
17:48 <stickies-v> yeah good point - and to be clear i'm not advocating for any of this, just checking boundaries
17:48 <rahim> could the wallet construct the transaction, but not broadcast it until the EV is positive? Simply "waiting" doesn't seem very elegant...
17:48 <sipa> rahim: That's equivalent to just using a lower feerate.
17:48 <glozow> rahim: the feerate of the transaction wouldn't change after you've created it
17:48 <sipa> The feerate is choice by the user.
17:49 <Murch> glozow: Wouldn't they'd just have a few extra transactions below minRelayTxFeeRate? I.e. expect a few more txes to be in a block when it would otherwise not be full?
17:49 <rahim> gotcha, makes sense
17:49 <glozow> but yeah you could just wait until the feerates are low to sweep your wallet
17:49 <glozow> Murch: sorry who's they?
17:50 <rahim> glozow: Andreas Antonop has talked about that before, right
17:50 <Murch> People with a lower minRelayTxFeerate: how would their Mempool be "unreliable"?
17:50 <glozow> oh. the 1sat/vB floor doesn't change even if your mempool is empty, so if your mempool accepts something under 1sat/vB, that doesn't mean it'll propagate
17:50 <glozow> ideally your mempool is a good indicator of what miners have in their mempools
17:51 <Murch> Ah yes, in that regard they would be unreliable.
17:52 <glozow> alright i'll just throw out a few of the implementation questions now, since we're running out of time
17:52 <glozow> What is the type of `bnb_result` declared here https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/89d1d6ff4c79b31f4b6849c7ef906833cfd49d85#diff-6e06b309cd494ef5da4e78aa0929a980767edd12342137f268b9219167064d13R410 (and srd_result a few lines below)? How does it resolve as a boolean expression in the if statement?
17:53 <erik> It's std::optional
17:53 <larryruane> it's an optional, which means it can have a value or not, sort of replaces using a null pointer to mean no value
17:53 <glozow> erik: almost there, it's an optional what?
17:53 <stickies-v> SelectionResult
17:53 <glozow> bingo
17:54 <glozow> larryruane: yep, true if there's a `SelectionResult`, false if it's a nullopt
17:54 <glozow> but on that line, why use `auto`?
17:54 <erik> Optional can be used in expressions, if some data is returned it return true, false otherwise 
17:54 <larryruane> you can test an optional value as if it's a boolean, but a more explicit way is to call `has_value()` (i think)
17:54 <erik> Like Some() in Rust
17:55 <sipa> Or Just in Haskell.
17:55 <glozow> erik: yeah exactly
17:55 <erik> glozow: Auto instructs the compiler to infer the type
17:55 <erik> With is std::optional
17:55 <erik> *infer based on the assigment
17:55 <glozow> erik: yup
17:56 <glozow> Can you find other examples of this calling pattern in the codebase? We use it quite often
17:56 <kalpa> what does bnb and srd stand for?
17:56 <glozow> kalpa: Branch and Bound, Single Random Draw. coin selection algos
17:57 <larryruane> you can use the indirect (*) to fetch the value or you can be more explicit and call the `value()` method
17:57 <sipa> Super pedantic nit: auto isn't "the compiler inferring the type"; it is specified by the language what the type is; just implied by the expression rather than being explicit (I say this because it isn't like compilers that are smarter can be better at this or so).
17:57 <brunoerg> interesting
17:58 <glozow> sipa: right
17:58 <glozow> and you won't accidentally cast something
17:58 <kouloumos> kalpa: good discussion on those at https://bitcoincore.reviews/17526
17:59 <glozow> alrighty the rest of the questions are left as an exercise to the PR reviewer :) thank you all for coming!
17:59 <glozow> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
