---
layout: pr
date: 2023-05-10
title: "Accept options as named-only parameters"
pr: 26485
authors: [ryanofsky]
components: ["rpc/rest/zmq"]
host: stickies-v
status: past
commit: 2808c33ba
---

## Notes

- RPC methods can take parameters in three ways:
  - Using positional parameters, e.g. `bitcoin-cli getblock "00000000c937983704a73af28acdec37b049d214adbda81d7e2a3dd146f6ed09"`
  - Using named parameters, e.g. `bitcoin-cli named getblock blockhash="00000000c937983704a73af28acdec37b049d214adbda81d7e2a3dd146f6ed09"`
  - Using an `options` object, e.g. `bitcoin-cli -named bumpfee "66975ce3ea2b0815d677eaac1f1822276943cf7361d3eb920ad3cc278b473609" options='{"fee_rate": 10}'`

- For an end-user (especially through `bitcoin-cli`), the `options` notation can be quite verbose, especially when they just want to specify a single parameter.

- Some endpoints, such as `send`, allow passing parameters such as `conf_target` either as a `options` field or a named/positional parameter, but this comes with [code overhead](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L57-L77) and needs to be implemented by every RPC method.

- To simplify the interface, [#26485](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26485) allows any `options` parameter to also be passed as a named parameter.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. Why do some RPCs use an `options` parameter? Do we still need it? If so, what for? If not, can we remove it?

1. Which function is responsible for checking if an `options` field is passed as a named parameter? What other approaches can you think of to achieve the same goal this PR is trying to achieve?

1. The [documentation for `send`](https://bitcoincore.org/en/doc/24.0.0/rpc/wallet/send/) lists `conf_target` both as a named argument (#2) as well as a field in `options`. When looking at [the code](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1180-L1233), however, it seems like `conf_target` is defined only [once](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1186). How is this possible?

1. Why does `RPCHelpMan::GetArgNames()` [now return](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-647c2f0c4261e4ba2bbfc487178f54f4702ad284b52c1ed2dbbd30a53a5ad487R609) a `std::vector<std::pair<std::string, bool>>` instead of a `std::vector<std::string>`? What does the `bool` represent?

1. In [`transformNamedArguments`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R440), why do we use `__pushKV` instead of `pushKV`?

1. What is the `fr` input parameter? Why are [we handling this case separately](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R460-R462)?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <stickies-v> #startmeeting
17:00 <kevkevin> hi
17:01 <pablomartin> hello
17:01 <stickies-v> welcome everyone! Today we're looking at #26485, authored by ryanofsky. The notes and questions are available on https://bitcoincore.reviews/26485
17:01 <effexzi> Hi every1
17:01 <abubakarsadiq> hello
17:01 <stickies-v> anyone joining us for the first time today? even if you're just lurking, feel free to say hi!
17:02 <stickies-v> who got the chance to review the PR or read the notes? (y/n)
17:02 <kevkevin> n
17:02 <kevkevin> well read some of the notes
17:02 <pablomartin> n - not yet, it was on my list of pendings
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> I read the PR and concept Ack
17:04 <stickies-v> nice one abubakarsadiq ! looks like not too many have gone in-depth so we can stay a bit more on the high level too, today, let's see.
17:04 <stickies-v> how would you summarize this PR in your own words?
17:04 <LarryRuane> hi
17:05 <pablomartin> it adds a possibilty to avoid verbose options and passing "named args" as a dict
17:05 <yashraj> this PR simplifies the syntax of some RPC commands?
17:06 <stickies-v> pablomartin: could you go in a bit more detail on the "passing named args as a dict" bit?
17:06 <abubakarsadiq> the PR enables rpc options parameter keys to be also passed as parameters
17:06 <stickies-v> yashraj: is it a backwards compatible simplification?
17:07 <pablomartin> sorry, the other way around, haha, my bad... instead of options='{"fee_rate": 10}' as a named arg fee_rate=10
17:07 <stickies-v> abubakarsadiq: named parameters, to be precise! can they both be passed as an options items as well as a named parameter?
17:08 <pablomartin> *params, not args yeah
17:08 <stickies-v> pablomartin: well, that's just the cli syntax. on the RPC side (which is the only thing this PR is touching), we're indeed passing named arguments as a dict/object, but that's nothing new - we already had named arguments
17:09 <pablomartin> true, i was referring to the bitcoin-cli side
17:09 <yashraj> stickies-v: yeah you can still use the options={}
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> you can pass as either named params or option items, I am not sure though
17:09 <stickies-v> yashraj: exactly! it's just an additional way to interface with RPC, applications can keep using the `options` parameter
17:09 <LarryRuane> I like how the PR updates all the tests to use the simplified syntax!
17:10 <LarryRuane> (er... i'm not sure if "all" but many at least)
17:11 <stickies-v> abubakarsadiq: only one of both is allowed, but you can mix and match (pass some as options keys, and others as named args): https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R460-R473
17:12 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: yeah, it definitely does make things more readable 👍
17:12 <stickies-v> Which function is responsible for checking if an `options` field is passed as a named parameter? What other approaches can you think of to achieve the same goal this PR is trying to achieve?
17:12 <abubakarsadiq> thanks stickes: talking about that whats fr?
17:13 <LarryRuane> Probably some of the tests should use the old syntax to make sure it doesn't break (and some may still, I didn't check)
17:13 <abubakarsadiq> transformNamedArguments
17:13 <stickies-v> abubakarsadiq: we'll get to that in a later question, actually!
17:13 <stickies-v> abubakarsadiq: yeah I did kinda give it away with my previous link already hahaha
17:14 <yashraj> u for real
17:14 <stickies-v> so, does anyone have ideas for alternative approaches for this PR?
17:14 <stickies-v> yashraj: ?
17:14 <abubakarsadiq> yeah :)
17:15 <yashraj> sorry, ignore!
17:15 <LarryRuane> another proposal is (was): https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/17356
17:15 <LarryRuane> but I haven't looked to see how it differs
17:17 <stickies-v> yeah, I still need to look into it myself actually hah
17:17 <stickies-v> alright, moving on
17:17 <stickies-v> The documentation for `send` lists `conf_target` both as a named argument (#2) as well as a field in `options`. When looking at the code, however, it seems like `conf_target` is defined only once. How is this possible?
17:17 <pablomartin> yeah, same LarryRuane... it seems simpler/ less changes... but not sure about the use of it
17:18 <stickies-v> (links: https://bitcoincore.org/en/doc/24.0.0/rpc/wallet/send/ , https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1180-L1233 , https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1180-L1233)
17:20 <abubakarsadiq> initially is their a reason why some arguments are passed through `options` not named parameters e.g `conf_target` for send rpc
17:21 <stickies-v> ohh that's a great question abubakarsadiq and actually one that i meant to cover in the previous question
17:23 <stickies-v> named arguments have only been added to bitcoin core since v14.0
17:24 <stickies-v> and for RPCs with a lot of parameters, such as e.g. the `send` family, it's quite cumbersome to provide a whole bunch of null/default values for every single RPC call. 
17:24 <stickies-v> so the `options` parameter was used instead
17:24 <stickies-v> and now we have both for backwards compatibility
17:25 <LarryRuane> would the old way eventually be removed? I'm guessing probably not?
17:25 <stickies-v> I think that's the main reason, but I wasn't there when all of this was done, so I may be missing something
17:25 <abubakarsadiq> thats cool, you can use any. thanks stickies-v.
17:26 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: seems pretty low priority, probably, at least until we more drastically overhaul the RPC interface?
17:26 <LarryRuane> stickies-v: +1 thanks
17:26 <stickies-v> (hint for the current question: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1231)
17:29 <pablomartin> indicates if /*named_only=*/?
17:31 <stickies-v> so my point is if you run `bitcoin-cli help send`, the help shows definitions for e.g. `conf_target` twice: once as a named parameter, and once as an `options` field. but in the code, we only seem to be defining it once
17:31 <stickies-v> but so the trick is that we sometimes just put a bunch of cli args in a function so we can reuse it in multiple places, which is what's happening here with https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1231
17:32 <stickies-v> and then we use the `Cat` helper function to just concatenate both vectors: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L1191
17:33 <abubakarsadiq> because because it's passed in FundTxDoc, with other args like pubkeys
17:33 <stickies-v> anyway, not something super relevant to the PR but i found interesting to highlight since it's a pattern used in quite a few methods
17:33 <LarryRuane> oh I see, it's in there also: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/6c7ebcc14b7908a67a8f8764b398e76c8fb4fe8b/src/wallet/rpc/spend.cpp#L456
17:33 <stickies-v> abubakarsadiq: LarryRuane yup!
17:33 <stickies-v> Why does `RPCHelpMan::GetArgNames()` now return a `std::vector<std::pair<std::string, bool>>` instead of a `std::vector<std::string>`? What does the `bool` represent?
17:33 <pablomartin> I see
17:34 <stickies-v> (link: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-647c2f0c4261e4ba2bbfc487178f54f4702ad284b52c1ed2dbbd30a53a5ad487R609)
17:35 <pablomartin> oh, my last answer was for this one actually
17:35 <LarryRuane> the comment for that function kind of gives it away: "Return list of arguments and whether they are named-only"
17:36 <pablomartin> like here: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3/src/rpc/util.cpp#L657
17:37 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: yeah I guess it does haha, but why do we need to distinguish here between which arguments are named-only?
17:41 <stickies-v> the answer is pretty simple actually, we just want to be able to specify for which objects we enable passing keys as named parameters
17:42 <stickies-v> alright, moving on:
17:42 <yashraj> someone might use named-only with the options syntax?
17:42 <stickies-v> In `transformNamedArguments`, why do we use `__pushKV` instead of `pushKV`?
17:42 <stickies-v> (link: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R440)
17:42 <stickies-v> yashraj: this is an internal API, not something we'd expose to the end user
17:43 <stickies-v> whoever implements the RPC method needs to define the parameters and how they can be specified
17:45 <yashraj> thanks
17:45 <pablomartin> yeah you need to be able to distinguish cos you need to pass/ push it to a diff section
17:46 <LarryRuane> looks like __pushKV allows multiple of same key?
17:48 <stickies-v> pablomartin: oh yeah, absolutely, the end-user decides whether they pass positional or named args. but adding the `bool` as a `pair` item allows us to let the developer specify per-method how they want this behaviour to work, as opposed to for example automatically enabling it for all `OBJ` parameters, or for all `OBJ` parameters named `options`
17:48 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: exactly. (why) is that safe?
17:49 <LarryRuane> for anyone who would like a link: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e0a70c5b4f2c691e8d6b507c8ce879f0b0424254/src/univalue/lib/univalue.cpp#L118
17:50 <LarryRuane> oh because we've already checked that it doesn't exist: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R437
17:51 <pablomartin> stickies-v: thanks
17:51 <LarryRuane> so it's a small performance improvement (?)
17:53 <stickies-v> LarryRuane: yeah exactly. kinda like how even though when accessing a vector element it's safer and generally recommended to use `v.at(i)`, you'll often see `v[i]` used in our codebase but (typically/hopefully) only if we've ensured that `i` definitely is in range, because then it's just a bit faster
17:54 <stickies-v> alright abubakarsadiq now we're coming back to the q you had earlier
17:54 <stickies-v> What is the `fr` input parameter? Why are we handling this case separately?
17:54 <stickies-v> link: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/411485082c22b86e1224f60534fccf1e2bb8e8f3#diff-019ee7d5e66b74eac42199f64e08cd0e90af4603bb3c105e294665ea4b411219R460-R462
17:55 <LarryRuane> stickies-v: +1 and also I'd say using `__pushKV` documents the code better... because it describes exactly what the effect will be
17:59 <stickies-v> i think (but didn't name the variable) that `fr` just stands for `find_result` or something (not a huge fan of 1-2 letter named variables...)
18:00 <LarryRuane> OH! that makes sense, I couldn't figure that out!
18:00 <stickies-v> we just want to check if we've already processed the key/value pair earlier, and if so throw an error, to avoid people passing the same parameter as option/positional/named parameter
18:00 <abubakarsadiq> yeah find_result is much better
18:00 <stickies-v> alright i think that's all for today folks, thank you for attending and see you next week!
18:01 <stickies-v> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
