---
layout: pr
date: 2023-05-31
title: "When a block is disconnected, update transactions that are no longer conflicted"
pr: 27145
authors: [ishaanam]
components: ["wallet"]
host: josibake
status: past
commit: 89df798
---

## Notes

- A transaction is considered *conflicted* when one or more of its inputs has been spent by another
confirmed transaction. A conflicted transaction is marked with negative depth equal to the number of
confirmations on the conflicting transaction.

- It's possible for a transaction to have previously been in a block that used to be part of the
most-work chain but has since been reorged out.

- The wallet keeps track of relevant transactions and their confirmation status. This information is
  used to calculate the wallet's balance(s). For example:

    - If a transaction that is 100 blocks deep in the most-work chain, the wallet can
      reasonably include its UTXOs in the balance displayed to the user.

    - If a transaction conflicts with another transaction 100 blocks deep in the most-work chain,
      the wallet can be equally sure that, even though the transaction may have a valid signature,
      its UTXOs do not count towards the user's balance.

    - If a transaction is unconfirmed and in the node's mempool, the wallet should account for its
      UTXOs, but not consider them as safe as confirmed ones.

- The author has provided more notes on transaction states and their effects on balance calculation [here](https://gist.github.com/ishaanam/846adf3b453c3a85fe6e15c882c57ae0#locations-where-tx-states-are-updated).

- [Wallet Transaction Conflict
  Tracking](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/Wallet-Transaction-Conflict-Tracking)
across chainstate and mempool events is tricky. As described in [Issue #7315](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/7315),
when a block is disconnected, the wallet should be marking conflicted transactions as inactive, but
isn't currently doing so. [PR #27145](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27145) updates the behavior to mark
transactions that are no longer conflicting after a reorg as inactive.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. What is the issue this PR addresses? Can you reproduce the problem described? (Hint: try running
   wallet\_conflicts.py on master. What error do you get?)

1. What are the different
   [states](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/25202cace9140870c75cb3a811e10045df88c226/src/wallet/transaction.h#L243)
a `CWalletTx` can be in?

1. Which, if any, of the `TxState`s are "final," i.e. once a transaction reaches this
state, it will never change again?

1. Where in net\_processing.cpp is `CWallet::blockDisconnected()` triggered to be executed (Hint: it is
   not directly called. See
[`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/66b08e78226059e2d31450aadc2423d77003eaf1/src/validationinterface.h#L61-L76))?
Which thread executes this wallet function?

1. What does the wallet do with
   [`TxUpdate::NOTIFY_CHANGED`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/096487c4dcfadebe5ca959927f5426cae1c304d5#diff-9ce137cd784ea308778842120aa2af6d2bb8369485b71f25e72b2a32cf0a5b21R328)? (Who is notifying whom, of what?)

1. What does `RecursiveUpdateTxState()` do and why is it "recursive"? What are its callsites?
   (Before you grep, where do you think this function should be called?)

1. What is tested in wallet\_conflicts.py? Can you think of any other cases that should be tested?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <josie> #startmeeting
17:00 <josie> hi! 
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> Hi
17:00 <kevkevin> hi
17:00 <glozow> hi
17:00 <LarryRuane> hi
17:00 <Pins> hi
17:00 <ranemirus> hi
17:00 <pablomartin> hello
17:00 <hernanmarino> Hi
17:00 <effexzi> Hi every1 
17:01 <SebastianvStaa> hi
17:01 <josie> welcome to this week's PR review club. any first timers here?
17:01 <Pins> Me
17:01 <josie> Pins: welcome! 
17:01 <Pins> Thanks!
17:01 <glozow> Pins: welcome!
17:02 <josie> just a general reminder: don't hesitate to ask a question or speak up (no need to ask if its okay to ask)
17:02 <josie> first question: did you get a chance to review the PR?
17:03 <josie> (can respond with a y/n)
17:03 <SebastianvStaa> y
17:03 <kevkevin> n :(
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> y
17:03 <hernanmarino> n, just lurking today 
17:03 <pablomartin> same
17:03 <Pins> y
17:03 <josie> if you did review it, what was your approach? and what's your conclusion? concept/approach ack, or nack?
17:03 <josie> lurking is always fine :) 
17:04 <hernanmarino> From a light reading , approach ACK .
17:05 <abubakarsadiq> Tested Ack I, run the test on the PR it passed, and also run the functional test on master to ensure the test fail.
17:05 <SebastianvStaa> same here
17:05 <ishaana> hi
17:05 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: same
17:05 <josie> abubakarsadiq: nice! I was curious if anyone got a chance to run the test on master before the PR got merged
17:06 <stickies-v> (and if you didnt before it got merged, you still can, of course: https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/website/pull/685#discussion_r1211727602)
17:07 <josie> stickies-v: thanks for the link!
17:07 <abubakarsadiq> Yeah, thats what I did, thanks for the link and help stickies-v
17:07 <josie> so question 2: what issue does this PR address? can you reproduce the problem?
17:08 <josie> (for those who ran the test on master pre-merge, this should be an easy question :D) 
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> This PR address issue whereby if a block is disconnected, the state of all the transaction in the block that our node/wallet know will change to inactive and have 0 confirmations. 
17:09 <josie> (also, forgot to post this at the beginning! we are discussing: https://bitcoincore.reviews/27145)
17:10 <SebastianvStaa> On master, formerly conflicted txns are not set from conflicted to inactive after reorg
17:10 <SebastianvStaa> (reorginging out of the conflicted txn)
17:13 <josie> SebastianvStaa: yep! before this PR, txs marked as conflicted were not being updated to the correct state of inactive when relevant 
17:15 <josie> abubakarsadiq: I didn't actually verify what the behavior was before this PR, so you maybe correct. I'd say the main issue this PR attempts to address is *not* marking txs as inactive on blockDisconnect, when they should be marked inactive 
17:15 <josie> unrelated question: did anyone get a chance to read the wiki or the gist linked in the notes? if not, I'd recommend it! I learned a lot about re-orgs and transaction states by reading them 
17:16 <glozow> indeed! https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/Wallet-Transaction-Conflict-Tracking
17:16 <glozow> https://gist.github.com/ishaanam/846adf3b453c3a85fe6e15c882c57ae0#locations-where-tx-states-are-updated
17:17 <josie> okay, moving on to question 3: what are the different states a CWalletTx (a transaction known by the wallet) can be in?
17:17 <josie> glozow: thanks! 
17:17 <abubakarsadiq> thanks josie
17:17 <SebastianvStaa> TxStateConfirmed: Contains corresponding block information
17:17 <SebastianvStaa> TxStateInMempool
17:17 <SebastianvStaa> TxStateConflicted: Contains corresponding conflicting block information
17:17 <SebastianvStaa> TxStateInactive: Can be abandoned or not
17:17 <SebastianvStaa> TxStateUnrecognized: Treated as inactive
17:18 <abubakarsadiq> Inactive, Confirmed, Conflicted, InMempool, and Unrecognized
17:19 <josie> SebastianvStaa, abubakarsadiq: yep! curious what you think about Unrecognized? I was trying to think of an example of an Unrecognized state and couldn't come up with one 
17:20 <SebastianvStaa> josie don't know yet. Just looked up the state definitons in the code
17:20 <abubakarsadiq> Josie, Are they transaction whose inputs are known to the node?
17:21 <josie> yeah, same. Unrecognized stuck out to me tho, as it seems like this is an area we should be able to account for everything 
17:21 <glozow> what does a tx state start as if you created but couldnt broadcast it (yet)?
17:22 <glozow> or would that never go to mapwallet?
17:22 <josie> abubakarsadiq: it's certainly possible to have external inputs in a tx, but I don't think this would apply here as the inputs would either be in a confirmed or unconfirmed state. if its confirmed the node definitely knows about it since it appears in a block
17:22 <ishaana> glozow: TxStateInactive
17:22 <glozow> ishaana: ah thanks
17:22 <ishaana> and I think it would be added to mapWallet
17:23 <josie> glozow, ishaana: interesting! my gut reaction was to say it wouldn't be added to mapWallet yet 
17:24 <josie> seems like Unrecognized might be a better state than inactive for a tx yet to be broadcasted? anyways, don't want to go on too far a tangent 
17:25 <josie> question 4: what transaction states are considered "final" ?
17:26 <josie> by final, we mean once a tx reaches this state it will never (or it is extremely unlikely) change states again
17:26 <SebastianvStaa> josie since there is only statistical finality in Bitcoin, probably no txns state is final forever
17:26 <abubakarsadiq> considering reorg happens i dont think there is
17:26 <SebastianvStaa> abubakarsadiq +1
17:27 <Pins> +1
17:27 <josie> SebastianvStaa, abubakarsadiq: reading the question from the notes, I agree :) which is why I added the "extremely unlikely" qualifier 
17:27 <ishaana> glozow, josie: see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f08bde7f715cf84ef050c3f6902bc75fb90cedb3/src/wallet/wallet.cpp#L2314
17:29 <glozow> thanks for the link!
17:29 <ishaana> I don't think that an "abandoned" transaction can change tx state, but technically that would just be a TxStateInactive transaction
17:29 <josie> but I think we have to assume some notion of probabilistic finality, otherwise something like showing a wallet balance would be impossible
17:30 <josie> so given that we accept some notion of probabilistic finality, what states would you consider "final"/
17:30 <josie> ?*
17:30 <abubakarsadiq> I also noticed while running the test on master,  that even though the conflicting transaction state does not change to inactive 0 confirmations it was accepted to the mempool and mined in the next block after rebroadcast. https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f08bde7f715cf84ef050c3f6902bc75fb90cedb3/test/functional/wallet_conflicts.py#L119 this line passes when running test/functional/wallet_conflicts.py 
17:30 <abubakarsadiq> on master before this pr was merged, just asking conceptually the real problem that will require the state to change to inactive
17:32 <SebastianvStaa> josie TxStateConfirmed could be considered final (unless reorg)
17:33 <josie> SebastianvStaa: correct! TxStateConfirmed is considered (increasingly) final the more confirmations it has. The PR specifically mentions 100 blocks as a number where a TxState is definitely considered final 
17:34 <Pins> +1 (considering it is extremely unlikely the reorg)
17:34 <josie> any other states we might consider "final" (especially if we assume > 100 confirmations)
17:35 <wim96> spend?
17:35 <Pins> TxStateConflicted
17:35 <SebastianvStaa> yes, that is also the time span after which the coinbase transaction becomes spendable
17:35 <abubakarsadiq> +1 Josie
17:36 <josie> abubakarsadiq: I'm not sure I follow your question? The conflicted transaction shouldn't be mine-able as it would be spending inputs that are already confirmed spent in the longest chain
17:36 <josie> wim96: I would consider "spent" as TxConfirmed
17:37 <SebastianvStaa> josie maybe TxStateConflicted could be considered final after conflicting txn is mined 100 blocks deep
17:38 <josie> Pins, SebastianvStaa: ah! so it seems we agree that TxConflicted is not really a "final" state. based on this PR, what state does a TxConflicted tx get updated to? (e.g on blockDisconnect)
17:39 <abubakarsadiq> Josie the conflicting transaction's block was disconnected. 
17:39 <Pins> TxStateInactive
17:40 <abubakarsadiq> TxStateInactive
17:40 <SebastianvStaa> josie TxStateInactive
17:40 <josie> Pins: yep! from my understanding of the PR, I'd say TxStateInactive is a "final" state for a tx in our wallet 
17:41 <Pins> Agreed
17:41 <josie> so we have TxConfirmed (the tx in a block that is part of the heaviest chain), and TxInactive (txs that were at one point in a conflicting block, but that block is no longer part of the longest chain)
17:42 <josie> okay, question 5: where in `net_processing.cpp` is `CWallet::blockDisconnected()` triggered to be executed? 
17:42 <josie> which thread executes this wallet function?
17:43 <SebastianvStaa> josie: didn'T we state earlier that TxStateInactive is also the inital state for a txn after creation?
17:43 <SebastianvStaa> [7:21:45 PM] <glozow> what does a tx state start as if you created but couldnt broadcast it (yet)?
17:43 <SebastianvStaa> [7:22:13 PM] <glozow> or would that never go to mapwallet?
17:43 <SebastianvStaa> [7:22:32 PM] <ishaana> glozow: TxStateInactive
17:43 <SebastianvStaa> [7:22:55 PM] <glozow> ishaana: ah thanks
17:44 <SebastianvStaa> so I don't see why this state could be considered 'final'
17:45 <josie> SebastianvStaa: yep, which is a bit surprising to me, tbh. I suppose "final" almost always is accompanied with some notion of confirmations
17:46 <SebastianvStaa> josie ok makes sense. the state by itself is not final, the txn need more properties for that
17:47 <josie> yep! that's how I think about it. An Inactive tx which spends inputs in the UTXO set wouldn't be considered final
17:47 <josie> but an Inactive tx which spends inputs that were spent many blocks back by a different transaction I would definitely consider to be in a final state 
17:50 <josie> feel free to throw out any ideas regarding question 5. I'll admit, I don't think I know the answer to this one 
17:50 <SebastianvStaa> I'm curious about question 5 as well, as I don't understand thread concurrency in Bitcoin Core (yet)
17:50 <josie> (altho, I did learn that subscribers to the ValidationInterface can assume that events happen in a sequential order, which is kinda cool)
17:53 <josie> ishaana: curious if you have any insights for question 5? 
17:54 <josie> SebastianvStaa: threading in bitcoin core is quite the beast! I'm still stumbling my way through understanding it 
17:54 <SebastianvStaa> this link on the topic seems quite cool. Currently reading it: https://diyhpl.us/wiki/transcripts/scalingbitcoin/tokyo-2018/edgedevplusplus/overview-bitcoin-core-architecture/
17:54 <SebastianvStaa> josie +1
17:55 <josie> let's move on to question 6: what does the wallet do with TxUpdate::NOTIFY_CHANGED? 
17:55 <yashraj> nice
17:55 <josie> (who is notifying whom, of what?)
17:56 <josie> SebastianvStaa: great link! thanks for sharing. https://obc.256k1.dev/ is also a great architecture overview, which might be slightly more up to date 
17:57 <SebastianvStaa> very nice resource! Thanks
17:57 <lightlike> as for q5: looks like ActivateBestChain() is called in various places in net_processing, which can lead to DisconnectTip() in validation being called, which then creates the BlockDisconnected() signal which is picked up by the wallet later.
17:58 <abubakarsadiq> Josie: After running the test on master before this pr was merged the error was
17:58 <abubakarsadiq>   `AssertionError: not(-15 == 0)` for both https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f08bde7f715cf84ef050c3f6902bc75fb90cedb3/test/functional/wallet_conflicts.py#LL115C5-L115C5 and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f08bde7f715cf84ef050c3f6902bc75fb90cedb3/test/functional/wallet_conflicts.py#LL117C3-L117C3
17:58 <abubakarsadiq> when I commented the two lines the test passes this>> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/f08bde7f715cf84ef050c3f6902bc75fb90cedb3/test/functional/wallet_conflicts.py#LL119C1-L119C1, My question is that If the state of the conflicting transaction did not change before the PR from TxConflicted to TxInactive why does it this pass on master
17:59 <josie> lightlike: thanks! I got as far as DisconnectTip() -> BlockDisconnected() but didn't realize it was originating with ActivateBestChain()
18:00 <ishaana> josie: yeah it looks like it is called during ActivateBestChain()
18:00 <josie> that's time, so we'll stop here, but I'd encourage everyone to work through the remaining questions! 
18:00 <josie> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
