---
layout: pr
date: 2023-11-01
title: "Fee Estimator updates from Validation Interface/CScheduler thread"
pr: 28368
authors: [ismaelsadeeq]
components: ["tx fees and policy"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: upcoming
commit:
---

_Notes and questions to follow soon!_

<!-- TODO: Before meeting, add notes and questions
## Notes

## Questions
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?
-->


<!-- TODO: After a meeting, uncomment and add meeting log between the irc tags.
## Meeting Log

### Meeting 1

{% irc %}
-->
<!-- TODO: For additional meetings, add the logs to the same irc block. This ensures line numbers keep increasing, avoiding hyperlink conflicts for identical line numbers across meetings.
### Meeting 2

-->
{% endirc %}
