---
layout: pr
date: 2023-05-24
title: "Testing Bitcoin Core 25.0 Release Candidates"
components: ["tests"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: past
commit:
---

## Notes

- Major versions of Bitcoin Core are released every 6-8 months. See the [Life
  Cycle documentation](https://bitcoincore.org/en/lifecycle/) for full details.
- When all of the PRs for a release have been merged, _Release Candidate 1_
  (rc1) is tagged. The rc is then tested. If any issues are found, fixes are
  merged into the branch and a new rc is tagged. This continues until no major
  issues are found in an rc, and that rc is then considered to be the final
  release version.
- To ensure that users don't experience issues with the new software, it's
  essential that the rcs are thoroughly tested. This special review club
  meeting is for people who want to help with that vital review process.

- This [Bitcoin Core Release Candidate Testing
  Guide](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide) provides guidance for testing the release candidate.

  - It is recommended to go through the "Preparation" steps ahead of the meeting, especially if you want to compile from source. Verify and confirm the successful installation of v25rc2.

  - The testing guide relies on the tools `jq` which are not installed by default on each platform. For example on macOS, you can install these ahead of time using `brew install`. Alternatively, you can also modify the instructions to avoid using these tools as they are not strictly necessary and/or can be replaced by other tools.

  - For some of the tests, you might want to have the [signet](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Signet) chain fully synced beforehand, so that you can just copy the signet directory into `/tmp/25-rc-test/` every time you run a test in a fresh environment.

- The guide is just to get you started on testing, so feel free to read the [Release Notes](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Notes-Draft)
  and bring ideas of other things you'd like to test!

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
16:59 <abubakarsadiq> #startmeeting
16:59 <glozow> hi
16:59 <d33r_gee> hello
16:59 <abubakarsadiq> Hello everyone welcome to this special edition of bitcoin core pr review club
16:59 <Tobses> yaay
17:00 <effexzi> Hi every1
17:00 <hernanmarino> hi all !
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> Feel free to say hello
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> Anyone joining in for the first time?
17:02 <abubakarsadiq> We will be testing the changes and new features in the upcoming release of bitcoin core version 25.0
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> Find the relevant notes and the link to the testing guide here https://bitcoincore.reviews/v25-rc-testing
17:05 <abubakarsadiq> The purpose of this is to ensure all the changes in this release are working as expected, the guide covers most but not all the changes, so go ahead and try to break things :).
17:06 <hernanmarino> ieay !
17:06 <brunoerg> hi 
17:07 <abubakarsadiq> Welcome !
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> Which os are you all using / and are you compiling from source or using pre-built binaries
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> pop os / compiling from source
17:09 <brunoerg> macOS 13.0 / compiling from source
17:10 <evansmj> macos 13.3.1, compiled from source
17:10 <hernanmarino> Linux  6.0.10 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Wed Nov 30 15:00:02 -03 2022 x86_64 x86_64 x86_64 GNU/Linux
17:10 <hernanmarino> compiling from source 
17:11 <abubakarsadiq> Great let's get started with the preparation step https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#preparation
17:11 <SebastianvStaa> Ubuntu, compiled from source
17:12 <abubakarsadiq> Lets spare a few minutes for that step, you can go ahead and start testing if you are done with this step 🚀
17:14 <d33r_gee> Compiling from source Ubuntu 20.04
17:15 <abubakarsadiq>  There are majorly 4 test in the guide with some bonus tests 
17:16 <abubakarsadiq> There is a major tests in the release notes that are not covered in the guide, the guide is a wip for feedback on it please drop comment here (https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/27736)
17:18 <abubakarsadiq> There are some major*
17:19 <abubakarsadiq> The first one is to test -maxconnections=0 will now disable -dnsseed and -listen
17:19 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#test--maxconnections0-will-now-disable--dnsseed-and--listen
17:23 <hernanmarino> Run smoothly , everything as expected
17:23 <abubakarsadiq> hernanmarino: great  
17:25 <d33r_gee> -maxconnections=0 ran w/o issues
17:26 <abubakarsadiq> Anyone having unexpected results can drop questions here on the issue
17:26 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/27621
17:27 <abubakarsadiq> Alright the next test is Test non-witness transaction that are greater than 65 bytes are allowed in the mempool and relayed #26265
17:27 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#test-non-witness-transactions-that-are-greater-than-65-bytes-are-allowed-in-the-mempool
17:33 <abubakarsadiq> Tips for the last step,  add 0 after the transactionhex to set the maxfeerate to 0
17:37 <d33r_gee> when running bcli -regtest sendrawtransaction ... getting error code: -25 error message:
17:37 <d33r_gee> bad-txns-inputs-missingorspent
17:38 <hernanmarino> did you replace your own txid when creating the raw transaction ? 
17:38 <d33r_gee> ah nope
17:38 <abubakarsadiq> Yes use the raw trxhex from your regtest node
17:38 <hernanmarino> you cannot simply copy and paste from the guide in this step, i believe. You should replace the txid with the one you got in the previous step 
17:39 <d33r_gee> ah ok got it
17:39 <abubakarsadiq> +1 hernanmarino
17:40 <abubakarsadiq> mine passed the tx was accepted in my mempool 🚀
17:40 <hernanmarino> aslo when you sign and send the rawtransaction you should use is the output you got when you created it 
17:41 <hernanmarino> and also when decoding and verifying  it s size
17:44 <abubakarsadiq> The third test is an interesting one, it tests Finalizing a PSBT with inputs spending Miniscript-compatible P2WSH scripts introduced in PR #24149
17:44 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#test-finalizing-a-psbt-with-inputs-spending-miniscript-compatible-p2wsh-scripts-and-test-spending-the-coin
17:51 <d33r_gee> ok it worked
17:52 <abubakarsadiq> Great same here :)
17:52 <brunoerg> worked here as well
17:52 <abubakarsadiq> We have some minutes to test one or two bonus tests
17:53 <hernanmarino> worked ok 
17:54 <abubakarsadiq> This is a good one if you have signet chain   https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/25.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#ensure-verifychain-returns-false-if-the-check-cant-be-completed
17:54 <abubakarsadiq> You can copy the signet directory to /tmp/25-rc-test for this
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> Please remember to add a comment on v25.0-rc2 testing issue detailing
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> Please remember to add a comment on v25.0-rc2 testing issue detailing:
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
