---
layout: pr
date: 2023-11-15
title: "Testing Bitcoin Core 26.0 Release Candidates"
components: ["tests"]
host: m3dwards
status: past
commit:
---

## Notes

- Major versions of Bitcoin Core are released every 6-8 months. See the [Life
  Cycle documentation](https://bitcoincore.org/en/lifecycle/) for full details.
- When all of the PRs for a release have been merged, _Release Candidate 1_
  (rc1) is tagged. The rc is then tested. If any issues are found, fixes are
  merged into the branch and a new rc is tagged. This continues until no major
  issues are found in an rc, and that rc is then considered to be the final
  release version.
- To ensure that users don't experience issues with the new software, it's
  essential that the rcs are thoroughly tested. This special review club
  meeting is for people who want to help with that vital review process.

- This [Bitcoin Core Release Candidate Testing
  Guide](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/26.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide) provides guidance for testing the release candidate.

  - It is recommended to go through the "Preparation" steps ahead of the meeting, especially if you want to compile from source. Verify and confirm the successful installation of v26rc2.

  - For some of the tests, you might want to have the [signet](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Signet) chain fully synced beforehand, so that you can just copy the signet directory into `/tmp/26-rc-test/` every time you run a test in a fresh environment.

- The guide is just to get you started on testing, so feel free to read the [Release Notes](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/26.0-Release-Notes-Draft)
  and bring ideas of other things you'd like to test!

## Meeting Log
{% irc %}
17:00 <stickies-v> #startmeeting
17:00 <stickies-v> hi everyone!
17:00 <maxedw> hi
17:01 <lightlike> hi
17:02 <stickies-v> anyone here for the first time? even if you're just lurking, feel free to say hi!
17:04 <stickies-v> not a massive turn out, it seems
17:05 <sipa> hi, lurking
17:05 <d33r_gee> hello
17:05 <stickies-v> ah, more people, yay!
17:06 <stickies-v> we've got a special edition of review club planned for this week, ahead of the (hopefully soon) final release of Bitcoin Core v26
17:07 <stickies-v> maxedw has prepared a fantastic guide to help test (some of) the new features of this new release: https://bitcoincore.reviews/v26-rc-testing
17:07 <stickies-v> the purpose of this meeting really is just to go through it together
17:08 <stickies-v> given that we're a bit of a smaller group, just polling if everyone's still keen to do that in this meeting, or if people would prefer to just go through it on their own pace?
17:08 <maxedw> thank you stickies-v
17:08 <maxedw> hello everyone, thanks for joining us for today's review club
17:08 <maxedw> we will be taking a look and a run through the Bitcoin Core 26.0 testing guide
17:08 <maxedw> link to the guide: https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/26.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide
17:09 <maxedw> what operating systems are people running?
17:09 <d33r_gee> WSL Ubuntu 22.04
17:09 <lightlike> I will do some testing later this week at my own pace, so I'd be just lurking.
17:09 <maxedw> no problem lightlike 
17:10 <maxedw> d33r_gee: great stuff
17:10 <stickies-v> i'm on macos 13.4, m1 chip
17:10 <maxedw> great stickies-v, there is a macos only test that you will be able to help out on
17:10 <maxedw> today we will cover: getprioritisedtransactions rpc, mportmempool rpc, V2 Transport - BIP 324, TapMiniscript and Ancestor Aware Funding 
17:11 <maxedw> I will leave the last test, Outbound connection management for you to do in your own time after this meeting
17:11 <maxedw> Did anyone manage to run through the preparation steps? No problem if not.
17:11 <d33r_gee> yep
17:12 <maxedw> fantastic, we won't need to spend much time getting prepped then
17:13 <stickies-v> same here!
17:13 <stickies-v> running compiled binaries
17:13 <maxedw> let's start the getprioritisedtransactions rpc test together
17:13 <stickies-v> well, self compiled
17:13 <maxedw> this should be a relatively easy test to start us off
17:15 <stickies-v> test works fine for me!
17:16 <d33r_gee> test went through no problems
17:16 <stickies-v> well i did find something interesting
17:16 <stickies-v> if i run the prioritisetransaction rpc twice on the same tx, the feerates compound
17:17 <stickies-v> right, okay, that is in line with the documentation of the rpc: "The fee value (in satoshis) to add (or subtract, if negative)"
17:18 <maxedw> great to hear, it also worked on my machine
17:18 <maxedw> interesting stickies-v 
17:18 <stickies-v> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0aa014d5a34ed6b020b687ec924f8a17351f5aeb/src/rpc/mining.cpp#L455
17:18 <maxedw> if everyone is ready, let's move onto the second test 
17:18 <d33r_gee> ready
17:19 <maxedw> importmempool
17:19 <maxedw> for this test, we can do it on mainnet (preferred) or on regtest.
17:19 <maxedw> does anyone have a mainnet node synced that they can test this RPC with?
17:21 <stickies-v> yup
17:21 <maxedw> great
17:22 <d33r_gee> yup got one that was synced using an utxo snapshot
17:22 <maxedw> that's excellent
17:22 <maxedw> nice to see mainnet being used where possible
17:22 <maxedw> let's have a go at this one
17:24 <maxedw> you may need to pay attention to the environment variables $DATA_DIR to make sure you have it pointing to a bitcoind data directory that's synced 
17:25 <d33r_gee> when I first ran  importmempool got this error:
17:25 <d33r_gee> error code: -10
17:25 <d33r_gee> error message:
17:25 <d33r_gee> Can only import the mempool after the block download and sync is done.
17:25 <d33r_gee> However waited a bit then reran and it worked
17:27 <maxedw> hmm, d33r_gee. I might have expected with `connect=0` it never to sync if it thought it was out of sync
17:27 <maxedw> but I think that's still a successful test
17:29 <d33r_gee> maxedw ah great I test it some more, do you think it may be because the chainstate came from a snapshot?
17:29 <maxedw> I'm not sure tbh
17:29 <maxedw> wouldn't have thought so
17:29 <d33r_gee> maxedw np
17:30 <stickies-v> d33r_gee: what do you get when you run `bcli getblockcount`?
17:31 <maxedw> I think I might add a check into the test to make sure we are fully synced before we stop bitcoind
17:32 <d33r_gee> maxedw great idea
17:32 <stickies-v> oh wait you're saying it worked eventually
17:32 <maxedw> at the moment mine says 816730
17:33 <d33r_gee> stickies-v yet waiting like 2min then reran and it worke
17:33 <stickies-v> my importmempool is still running, seems to take quite a while for a big mempool
17:33 <maxedw> but mine is stuck from my previous test with connect=0
17:34 <maxedw> stickies-v: for me it didn't take long
17:34 <maxedw> did it take a while for you d33r_gee ?
17:35 <d33r_gee> maxedw yep took longer than the regtest one for sure
17:35 <stickies-v> how big was yours maxedw? I've got   ("bytes": 1716322) and I'm on a pretty old machine
17:35 <maxedw> "bytes": 8098791
17:37 <stickies-v> interesting, looks like it's not really working for me then
17:39 <maxedw> let's pick this up after the call stickies-v 
17:39 <maxedw> I just ran mine again and it completed in about 10 seconds
17:40 <stickies-v> according to `top` it seems to be doing something, running with -debug=rpc and -debug=mempool but it doesn't really give me much, there's no intermediate logging
17:40 <stickies-v> i'll just let it run and see what happens
17:40 <maxedw> great idea
17:40 <maxedw> this is exactly why we run these tests!
17:41 <maxedw> let's move on to the next test
17:41 <stickies-v> oh wait
17:41 <stickies-v> i have an interesting idea to test
17:41 <stickies-v> on mainnet
17:41 <maxedw> go ahead stickies-v 
17:42 <stickies-v> what happens when you run importmempool, abort, run again, in very short sequence?
17:42 <maxedw> fyi, after my node synced my mempool size was similar to yours
17:42 <stickies-v> (abort the cli request w ctr+c, not kill the daemon)
17:42 <maxedw> great question
17:43 <maxedw> I can give it a go. d33r_gee are you still in a position to try?
17:43 <d33r_gee> maxedw yep
17:43 <stickies-v> my import finally succeeded: "Imported mempool transactions from disk: 40705 succeeded, 0 failed, 0 expired, 0 already there, 0 waiting for initial broadcast"
17:46 <d33r_gee> running importmempool right now
17:46 <maxedw> I reran the test with ctrl+c and then imported again and it worked for me
17:46 <maxedw> appears to anyway
17:46 <d33r_gee> it worked
17:46 <d33r_gee> "size": 48876
17:47 <maxedw> Imported mempool transactions from disk: 0 succeeded, 0 failed, 0 expired, 2959 already there, 0 waiting for initial broadcast
17:47 <maxedw> that is my second log message
17:47 <maxedw> so ctrl+c didn't appear to stop the import for me
17:47 <maxedw> I was quite quick at hitting it but maybe still too slow
17:47 <maxedw> or perhaps the command is running in another thread that doesn't exit
17:48 <stickies-v> no ctrl+c on the cli doesn't affect the daemon, and we don't recognize remote client disconnects
17:48 <stickies-v> so bitcoind keeps processing all requests even if the client's no longer listening
17:48 <stickies-v> but i was wondering if running simultaneous importmempool tasks would cause issues
17:48 <stickies-v> great, looks like it doesn't
17:49 <maxedw> I was perhaps not quick enough for it to be simultaneous
17:49 <maxedw> I will have another go after this meeting
17:49 <maxedw> shall we move onto the next test?
17:49 <maxedw> V2 transport
17:50 <d33r_gee> sounds good
17:50 <maxedw> which again could be done on different networks but for this guide we are using signet
17:51 <maxedw> I believe bitcoin.achow101.com should support v2 protocol on both signet and mainnet so please feel free to use whichever network you prefer
17:52 <maxedw> I just tried bitcoin.achow101.com on mainnet and got: Error: v2transport requested but not enabled (see -v2transport)
17:53 <maxedw> so I think if you plan to use that node, it's signet only at the moment
17:53 <stickies-v> mmm i think that's an error on your side maxedw 
17:53 <maxedw> you are right
17:54 <maxedw> I skipped a step
17:54 <maxedw> (didn't enable it for myself)
17:58 <maxedw> I now have: New manual v2 peer connected: version: 70016, blocks=816906, peer=18
17:59 <stickies-v> hmmm i wasn't able to connect to achow but i think he just wasn't accepting new inbounds
17:59 <stickies-v> will investigate more
17:59 <maxedw> the peer isn't listed in my peerinfo either
17:59 <maxedw> but I had that message in the logs
17:59 <maxedw> looks like we are out of time to run through the last couple of tests
18:00 <maxedw> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}