---
layout: pr
date: 2023-04-26
title: "Add importmempool RPC"
pr: 27460
authors: [MarcoFalke]
components: ["rpc/rest/zmq"]
host: larryruane
status: past
commit: fab8b370257c7770abc32649ad4940eefc512f44
---

## Notes

- The _mempool_ is the list of unconfirmed (pending) transactions.
  (_Rabbit hole warning:_) More information on the mempool can be found
  [here](https://bitcoinsearch.xyz/?q=mempool)

- Initially, the mempool was stored only in memory, as its name implies.
  [PR 8448](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/8448)
  implemented persisting the mempool to disk so that its entries are
  available after a restart. This PR was merged in
  [v0.14.0](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/release-notes/release-notes-0.14.0.md#retaining-the-mempool-across-restarts).

- The `mempool.dat` file, located in the datadir, is a binary file in a
  proprietary format, making it difficult to edit it manually.

- The entire mempool is kept in-memory, it is not just a cached subset
  of a larger data structure.

- The mempool is flushed to disk when the node shuts down,
  and also when requested using the
  [`savemempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/397ed22162f05fa7fb27c2e5f49f5917884b4716/src/rpc/mempool.cpp#L722)
  RPC.

- The [`-maxmempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/reduce-memory.md#memory-pool)
  configuration option sets mempool size, default is 300 (MB).

- Specifying the `-blocksonly` configuration option
  [reduces](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26471)
  the `-maxmempool` default to 5 MB.

- The [`getmempoolinfo`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/397ed22162f05fa7fb27c2e5f49f5917884b4716/src/rpc/mempool.cpp#L691)
  RPC shows a summary of the local mempool.

- The [`getrawmempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/397ed22162f05fa7fb27c2e5f49f5917884b4716/src/rpc/mempool.cpp#L381)
   RPC displays the full contents of the local mempool.

- Another way to modify your node's mempool is using the peer-to-peer network.
  [BIP35](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0035.mediawiki)
  introduced the
  [`NetMsgType::MEMPOOL`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/2cc43de69bdb995ac7faff4ed67caf773026ab29/src/net_processing.cpp#L4602)
  P2P message, which allows a node to request the contents of a peer's mempool,
  although this message has mostly fallen out of use; there is a
  [pull request](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27426) (currently draft)
  to remove it.

- This PR adds a new RPC, `importmempool`, to add the transactions in a given `mempool.dat`
  file to the existing mempool.


## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. What are the advantages of persisting the mempool to disk?

1. Briefly, in your own words, what does this PR do, what would
   be some of its use cases, and what problems does it solve?

1. How large is the mainnet `mempool.dat` file on your system?
   Does this size differ significantly from the `-maxmempool` setting?
   If so, why?

1. What happens if the imported mempool file contains transactions that
   are already in the mempool?

1. What happens if the `-maxmempool` configuration value is too small to accommodate
   the imported file?

1. The RPC arguments include three boolean options:
     - `use_current_time`
     - `apply_fee_delta_priority`
     - `apply_unbroadcast_set`

   What does each of these do, and why they are options to this RPC?

1. The [second commit](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/fa0a6bc1a47c5a1b659bbc18c49c1f07600eeed2)
   adds the
   [`ImportMempoolOptions`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/fa0a6bc1a47c5a1b659bbc18c49c1f07600eeed2#diff-ec4bd1642cf1575f2e44c908de766f91766c6257674f6a2d3bc02c04a0246e24R20-R22)
   struct. What is its purpose?

1. The [PR description](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27460#issue-1666222511)
   states that it's possible to copy an existing `mempool.dat` file between two
   data directories. Does this work even if the architectures are different
   (for example, 32-bit versus 64-bit, big-endian versus little-endian)?

1. What are these
   [calls to Ensure*()](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/fab8b370257c7770abc32649ad4940eefc512f44#diff-9c5b83de6dc84af277e352c88b9291aa44340a3c75f572a0b51661eb0a838de9R753-R756)
   doing? (These occur in many RPC handlers.)

1. What does the "1" mean
   [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/fab8b370257c7770abc32649ad4940eefc512f44#diff-84c7a7f36362b9724c31e5dec9879b2f81eae0d0addbc9c0933c3558c577de65R167)?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <LarryRuane> #startmeeting
17:00 <michaelfolkson> hi
17:00 <LarryRuane> Hi everyone, welcome! Today we'll be discussing https://bitcoincore.reviews/27460
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> hi
17:00 <LarryRuane> Feel free to say hi to let everyone know you're here
17:00 <svanstaa> hi
17:01 <LarryRuane> any review club first-timers here?
17:01 <michaelfolkson> Quiet today
17:01 <ccdle12> hi
17:01 <effexzi> Hi every1
17:01 <turkycat> hello everyone
17:02 <LarryRuane> yes, I think there's some meeting going on that many of the usuals are busy with
17:03 <LarryRuane> Today's PR is pretty simple, so I added a few notes items that aren't directly related to the PR, but just for discussion, background, and learning
17:03 <LarryRuane> any questions about the notes, or is there anything I got wrong, or you'd like to expand on?
17:04 <LarryRuane> I'm not an expert on the mempool, so I may have made some mistakes :)
17:05 <michaelfolkson> No first thought was what people will use this for but that's question 3
17:05 <LarryRuane> One thing I'd like to make special mention of is the link provided in the first note: https://bitcoinsearch.xyz/?q=mempool ... I wasn't aware of that myself until putting together these notes
17:05 <LarryRuane> It seems to be a nice way to search the mailing list discussions!
17:06 <LarryRuane> Yes, Michael, we can discuss that right now, what are the use cases for this proposed feature?
17:07 <michaelfolkson> No sorry, you can keep to the order :)
17:07 <LarryRuane> Or actually, first, what is being proposed here, what is the feature?
17:07 <LarryRuane> haha okay, let's first ask, did anyone have a chance to review the PR?
17:07 <svanstaa> importting mempool.dat via RPC as opposed to copying it into the .bitcoin dir
17:08 <svanstaa> yes
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> tested ACK the PR
17:08 <svanstaa> built and ran the tests
17:08 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: good! how does one use the RPC interface to do this, what exactly is the interface?
17:09 <LarryRuane> I guess I'm asking, what are the arguments to this new RPC?
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> this PR add rpc call for importing transactions in a mempool.dat file into a node mempool
17:09 <svanstaa> bitcoin-cli  importmempool path/mempool.dat
17:10 <michaelfolkson> svanstaa: On running the tests https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/98911/should-i-run-the-tests-every-time-i-review-an-open-bitcoin-core-pr
17:10 <turkycat> no, didn't have time to review this week.
17:11 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: thanks for that link, I hadn't seen that, looks very helpful
17:11 <svanstaa> not sure about the meaning of the boolean arguments though
17:11 <michaelfolkson> svanstaa: Basically try to go a little further and fiddle around with the relevant tests a bit. Just running them can be of limited value. But doesn't hurt to obvs
17:12 <LarryRuane> maybe we can take a little diversion, why should reviewers test a PR when CI is already doing so?
17:12 <svanstaa> @Larry it was Michael who posted the link, not me
17:14 <michaelfolkson> It can be helpful on strange OSes, strange hardware if not overlapping with CI
17:14 <LarryRuane> yes, good answer by michael, his SE answer kind of covers what I was asking
17:15 <LarryRuane> also as he says there, it's good to modify the tests slightly if you have enough understanding to do so, and that may uncover new problems
17:15 <michaelfolkson> Yup. Especially as tests are changed in this PR
17:15 <LarryRuane> I also like running the tests in debuggers (both on the python test and on bitcoind itself) and look around at various points along the execution of the tests, to see if things are as expected by my understanding
17:16 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: +1
17:16 <LarryRuane> let's go back in history a ways, question 2, What are the advantages of persisting the mempool to disk?
17:17 <abubakarsadiq> to recover the mempool after restart
17:17 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: yes, and why is that useful?
17:19 <LarryRuane> actually an even more basic question (i remember wondering this myself when first getting started), why do full nodes even need a mempool *if they're not mining*?
17:20 <LarryRuane> it's pretty obvious that miners need a mempool (to assumble a non-empty block so they can get the fees), but why do non-mining nodes want to maintain a mempool? there is some cost, after all
17:21 <turkycat> so that nodes can verify the transactions in a block. a single transaction doesn't contain key info like the amount of the input being spent or the scriptPubkey for that input. each node can independently verify that an input isn't a double spen
17:21 <abubakarsadiq> I might be wrong, since the received broadcasted transaction why not keep it, not to verify it twice when the received new blocks, some transactions in the block might be in their mempool
17:22 <michaelfolkson> Some argue they don't need to :) But more efficient if they have already verified all the transactions in a block before they receive details of a mined block
17:22 <LarryRuane> turkycat: I don't think that's correct, because there's a separate "coins" database that all full nodes maintain, and that's independent of the mempool, and the coins db is how double-spending is detected
17:22 <AlexWiederin> Agree with abubakarsadiq! Probably also reduces the "noise" of transactions going around if only transactions that are not in the mempool are forwarded to peers
17:23 <AlexWiederin> But not entirely sure
17:23 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: yes, that's a great reason ... there's a feature called compact blocks, and the reason they're compact is it's assumed that the receiver of the compact block has already seen and verified the "missing" transactions because they're in the mempool
17:24 <LarryRuane> another reason to have a mempool even if you're not mining is fee estimation ... if your own node is contructing a transaction, it needs to decide on a competitive fee
17:25 <LarryRuane> you don't want to either underpay or overpay ... the mempool helps a lot with that
17:25 <turkycat> I didn't know about the coins db, where is that located? (bit of an aside)
17:26 <turkycat> I thought there was only blocks, rev, chainstate, and indexes (including txindex if enabled)
17:26 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: yes, there's a script verification "cache" that prevents us from having to re-verify transactions that we've already verified (i don't know much detail on that)
17:26 <LarryRuane> turkycat: it's in the `chainstate` subdirectory of the data directory
17:27 <turkycat> thanks
17:27 <LarryRuane> oh you mentioned it already, ... it's not the most intuitively named!
17:28 <LarryRuane> also i think having mempools within full nodes helps with transaction relay, as @AlexWiederin said (i think)
17:28 <LarryRuane> so if we don't persist the mempool to disk, then when we restart, we'd have the problems we just mentioned, because we have forgotten all about the mempool
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> why does it require upto 300mb as default
17:29 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: you may know this, correct me if i'm wrong, but maintaining a mempool also lets us construct transactions that use unconfirmed (mempool) transactions as inputs
17:30 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: that's a great question! I have an idea, but anyone else want to answer that?
17:31 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Huh yeah hadn't thought of that. If the parent transaction wasn't created by our wallet I guess. The wallet would trust transactions it itself had constructed
17:31 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: yes the 300mb mempool size, my first impression is it seems kind of small by today's hardware standards, doesn't it?
17:32 <abubakarsadiq> for me it's kind of too much
17:32 <LarryRuane> that 300mb is *memory* size, by the way, not just the sum of the transactions as they appear on the wire or on disk ... the memory size is quite a bit larger, anyone know why?
17:32 <LarryRuane> *sum of the transactions SIZES i should have said
17:33 <svanstaa> because deserialized transactions take up more space
17:35 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: yes exactly! in C and C++, `struct` variables often have "holes" in them because of alignment requirements.. so for example, if an object is a byte plus an 8-byte integer, that serialzes to a 9-byte stream ...
17:35 <svanstaa> abubakarsadiq 300MB is less than 100 blocks... it happens that it gets filled up completely
17:36 <LarryRuane> but when stored in memory, the struct is padded out to the "alignment" of the struct, which in this case would be 8 bytes, so that struct would need 16 bytes in memory
17:37 <svanstaa> Is there a reaon why it is 300MB? Or just an arbitrary value? Would it hurt to increase the default value?
17:37 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: yes, that 300mb translates to i think around 150mb of transactions, which is somewhere around 100 blocks as you say, maybe a little less
17:38 <LarryRuane> so if we go with a rough estimate of 100 blocks worth of transactions, that's a LOT of blocks, the next block will be constructed from around the top 1% (by fee) of the mempool
17:39 <LarryRuane> in other words, 300mb is a lot from that perspective (which is what @abubakarsadiq said too)
17:39 <michaelfolkson> Just a default obvs, the user can lower it
17:40 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: i think the 300mb is a balance between nodes having a mempool that is pretty similar to miners' mempools, and also being a size that most nodes (even on a raspberry pi) can do
17:40 <LarryRuane> miners have an incentive to have a larger mempool, can anyone say why?
17:40 <yashraj> why does -blocksonly lower it all the way to 5 MB?
17:41 <AlexWiederin> LarryRuane to pick the one with the best fees?
17:41 <AlexWiederin> *pick the ones
17:41 <svanstaa> LarryRuane larger pool to pick high fee tranascations from
17:41 <svanstaa> *transactions
17:41 <LarryRuane> AlexWiederin: yes but, even with a 300MB mempool, they're only taking roughly the top 1%, so that will be the same even with a 500mb mempool
17:42 <LarryRuane> i think the reason may be (or at least one i thought of) is in case there are no new transactions being generated for an extended period of time, just a dropoff in demand...
17:43 <svanstaa> so what happens if my mempool is full, and I see another (high  fee) transaction incoming, would my node replace one of the txns currently in the mempool?
17:43 <michaelfolkson> yashraj: Blocksonly doesn't participate in transaction relay https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/114081/what-is-the-difference-between-blocksonly-and-block-relay-only-in-bitcoin-core
17:43 <LarryRuane> the mempool will slowly shrink as miners produce blocks ... so a miner would hate to completely run out of transactions to include in the block, because they'd like to get at least SOME fees
17:44 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: thanks, that's a very good one!
17:44 <yashraj> ah crap, thanks michael
17:45 <michaelfolkson> yashraj: So yeah just verifying blocks right Larry? Not maintaining a mempool?
17:45 <LarryRuane> block explorer nodes, by the way, usually run a larger mempool, right now https://mempool.space/ shows that the mempool is 279 out of 300mb
17:45 <michaelfolkson> If no mempool only needs something minimal like 5MB
17:45 <LarryRuane> but i've seen recently where the mempool size is greater than 300, it might say 400 / 300
17:46 <LarryRuane> the way that explorer knows that is by running a larger mempool
17:47 <LarryRuane> because of the inscription stuff going on recently, the mempool has exceeded 300mb (for those nodes that configured a higher value, obviously)
17:47 <LarryRuane> what happens if a node receives more transactions that it can fit in its mempool?
17:47 <LarryRuane> *than it can fit
17:48 <svanstaa> yeah that was my question. Does it kick out lower fee txns in favour of higher fee ones?
17:48 <yashraj> kick lower fees ones?
17:48 <LarryRuane> yashraj: yes, exactly... technically, the lowest *feerate* transactions are dropped
17:49 <svanstaa> that way 300MB should be completely sufficient
17:49 <LarryRuane> and https://mempool.space/ actually tells you the min feerate needed to stay in a 300mb mempool
17:50 <yashraj> of course, thanks.
17:50 <michaelfolkson> I think package relay would incentivize the need for larger default mempools if your machine can handle it, not resource constrained
17:50 <abubakarsadiq> a basic question, what will make a transaction to be dropped from the mempool
17:51 <michaelfolkson> Ideally you'd keep those low fee transactions around rather than booting them
17:51 <svanstaa> are we going to talk about the PR a little more? I was wondering about the meaning of these options: use_current_time
17:51 <svanstaa> apply_fee_delta_priority
17:51 <svanstaa> apply_unbroadcast_set
17:51 <LarryRuane> @michaelfolkson pointed out that the mempool size is configurable, but there's an advantage to leaving it default (even if you have a lot of memory), which is that your mempool will be similar to that of other nodes, and that makes fee estimation more accurate, and tx relay more efficient
17:51 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: yes, sorry! all these sidetracks ... anyone want to say what those options are for?
17:52 <LarryRuane> i can answer the first one, the mempool records the time each tx entered, because when a tx gets to be 2 weeks old, it gets dropped, no matter what its feerate is
17:52 <LarryRuane> (and even if there's room to keep it)
17:53 <LarryRuane> so when you're importing a mempool, do you want to reset the tx entrance times to the current time? or use the times stored in the imported mempool.dat?
17:53 <LarryRuane> i think the author of the PR wanted to let the user decide
17:53 <abubakarsadiq> i dont know about use_current_time but apply_fee_rate option to true means the transactions will be prioritize based delta fee, while importing transactions with high delta fee rates are prioritize
17:53 <LarryRuane> (in some situations one might be better than the other, or opposite)
17:54 <svanstaa> so default is true:  use the current system time
17:54 <svanstaa> which means the txns are made to appear like they have just been broadcasted?
17:55 <LarryRuane> so there's an RPC to artifically change a mempool tx's feerate, `prioritisetransaction`
17:55 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: yes ... so it's as if they've been been relayed to us over the p2p network
17:56 <svanstaa> and this would 'extend' the expiry date of two weeks. In which circumstances is this favourable?
17:56 <abubakarsadiq> apply_unbroadcast_set option to true, while importing  unbroadcasted transactions will be added to ubroadcast set, if it's false it will not be added
17:56 <LarryRuane> this `prioritisetransaction` value (per-tx) is also stored in `mempool.dat`, so do we want to import those from the file? or let them be zero?
17:56 <svanstaa> why extend their lifetime?
17:57 <LarryRuane> svanstaa: i don't know, guess it depends on exactly why you're importing transactions in the first place
17:57 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: yes ... what are unbroadcast transactions, anyone?
17:58 <svanstaa> feels like you are pouring zombie transactions into the network, but thats just my gut feeling :)
17:58 <svanstaa> got to ask Marco about it
17:58 <LarryRuane> yes you could ask on the PR
17:58 <LarryRuane> why is `use_current_time` defaulting to true?
17:59 <michaelfolkson> We didn't answer the use case question yet right? I'm assuming testing, I can't think of why a user would want to do this
17:59 <yashraj> maybe i kicked low-fee-rate txs coz memool was full, now it's empty so give them another chance?
18:00 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: thanks, good point.. I think it may be if you're an enterprise and want to spin up a new node, and make it effective ASAP... you could copy a mempool.dat from one of your existing nodes
18:00 <abubakarsadiq> Unbroadcast transactions are transactions that have been created and signed but not yet broadcasted to the network, how do they get to the mempool?
18:00 <LarryRuane> welp, guess that's all we have time for
18:00 <LarryRuane> #endmeeting
18:00 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Ok, thanks
18:00 <LarryRuane> but feel free to stick around (i will) to keep discussing
18:00 <svanstaa> thanks, everyone :)
18:00 <LarryRuane> sorry we didn't have time to get through all the questions
18:01 <yashraj> great stuff thanks :larryruane I loved the mini-detours
18:01 <AlexWiederin> Thanks all
18:02 <abubakarsadiq> larryRuane:thanks
18:02 <yashraj> thanks :michael gotta read that SE answer again
18:02 <LarryRuane> abubakarsadiq: unbroadcast has a very specific meaning, see this answer by @michaelfolkson https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/107214/what-does-unbroadcast-mean-what-does-it-mean-for-a-transaction-to-be-successful
18:02 <michaelfolkson> yashraj: Sure don't expect you to be able to read it during the meeting :)
18:03 <michaelfolkson> (For later)
18:03 <LarryRuane> yes @michaelfolkson does an amazing job on stackexchange!
18:03 <michaelfolkson> Maybe if your mempool was corrupted you'd want to import a different mempool from another of your nodes. Can't imagine that happens too much
18:04 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Ha thanks
18:04 <michaelfolkson> I'll ask on the PR, people on the PR seem to want it
18:04 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: regarding your SE answer there about unbroadcast ... is that concept only applicable to transactions that WE originate?
18:04 <LarryRuane> michaelfolkson: +1
18:06 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Yeah I think so. You don't care really if it isn't your transaction
18:06 <michaelfolkson> Not your responsibility. But if your transaction isn't propagating that is your problem
18:06 <abubakarsadiq> thanks for the link larryRuane
18:06 <LarryRuane> got it, that makes sense.. if we received the tx on the p2p network (not one we're originating), then we know that it has been relayed (at least to us)
18:07 <michaelfolkson> Yeah "initial broadcast"
18:07 <michaelfolkson> LarryRuane: Right
18:08 <abubakarsadiq> +1 michealfolkson: i understand
18:09 <LarryRuane> what about question 4: How large is the mainnet mempool.dat file on your system? Does this size differ significantly from the -maxmempool setting? If so, why?
18:09 <LarryRuane> on my system, it's only 89mb
18:10 <abubakarsadiq> I did not check that on mine
18:10 <yashraj> checking
18:10 <abubakarsadiq> currently on signet for testing purposes
18:11 <LarryRuane> which is only only about 29% of 300mb ... so most of the 300mb is indeed deserialization overhead, and also (forgot to mention this earlier), index overhead (because lots of fast lookups are needed for mempool items)
18:11 <LarryRuane> there's a complicated map (container) that lets you look up mempool txes in various ways, such as largest feerate
18:12 <yashraj> wtf is happening with mine? node window says 277 MB...the file itself only 131 KB
18:13 <LarryRuane> oh wait sorry, on that system (with the 89mb mempool.dat), the configuration is: `maxmempool=250`
18:13 <LarryRuane> (this is a raspi system, so not a lot of memory, they reduce it slightly)
18:14 <LarryRuane> so the mempool.dat file size is 35% of 300mb (not 29% as i said earlier)
18:15 <LarryRuane> yashraj: what is your `maxmempool`?
18:15 <LarryRuane> is that what "node window" means? i'm not familiar with "node window"
18:16 <yashraj> haha when I press cmd+I in gui
18:16 <yashraj> Information tab on that window
18:16 <LarryRuane> oh i almost never use the gui, i should try that
18:16 <LarryRuane> you can look for `maxmempool` in your bitcoin.conf file, what does it say?
18:17 <yashraj> it's not set in my conf file...so default?
18:18 <abubakarsadiq> if it's not set then it's probably the default
18:18 <LarryRuane> yes, then default, 300
18:18 <LarryRuane> 141kb is incredibly small!
18:18 <LarryRuane> is that mainnet?
18:18 <LarryRuane> if it's regtest or testnet or signet, then it might make sense
18:19 <yashraj> mainnet...block height shows 787114
18:20 <yashraj> is my OS counting it differently?
18:20 <LarryRuane> are you running `ls -l` on the mempool.dat file?
18:21 <LarryRuane> (to get that number, 141kb)
18:23 <yashraj> was doing it from Finder but running ls -l gives similar value
18:25 <LarryRuane> try `bitcoin-cli getmempoolinfo`, what does that say?
18:28 <yashraj> RPC tells me "size": 129831, "usage": 274325152, "maxmempool": 3000000
18:29 <yashraj> not sure what size means
18:34 <LarryRuane> i think size is the number of transactions
18:34 <LarryRuane> is there a "bytes" value shown?
18:34 <yashraj> "bytes" : 47345422
18:36 <LarryRuane> i think that's large your mempool is configured to be, that's even greater than the default?
18:37 <yashraj> what does that mean? maxmempool is 300 usage is ~270 what is bytes?
18:38 <LarryRuane> oh wait here's what we should look at: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/rpc/mempool.cpp#L691
18:38 <yashraj> also found this: https://developer.bitcoin.org/reference/rpc/getmempoolinfo.html
18:39 <LarryRuane> good find, that's easier to read!
18:39 <yashraj>			{RPCResult::Type::NUM, "bytes", "Sum of all virtual transaction sizes as defined in BIP 141. Differs from actual serialized size because witness data is discounted"},	so witness stuff is causing this?
18:40 <yashraj> mismatch is count
18:41 <LarryRuane> your "usage" seems about right.. (274 mb or so)
18:42 <LarryRuane> the in-memory mempool doesn't get flushed out until you shut down the node, can you do a clean shutdown and see if the file size increases?
18:43 <yashraj> bingo, now shows 94 MB
18:44 <yashraj> had this qn for the past half hour that why're we looking at mempool.dat if the mempool is in memory?
18:44 <LarryRuane> cool! so maybe when your node started the previous time, it wasn't fully synced with the blockchain?
18:45 <yashraj> how did you get the right number straight away?
18:45 <LarryRuane> my node was already synced
18:45 <yashraj> mine was synced too
18:45 <LarryRuane> (the most recent time it shutdown)
18:45 <LarryRuane> hmm i don't know then what's going on
18:45 <yashraj> oh
18:47 <LarryRuane> actually i'm not sure if the mempool gets flushed out to disk (mempool.dat) other than shutdown... I've been looking at the coins db recently (the chainstate), and i may be getting these two mixed up in my mind
18:47 <LarryRuane> the coins db doesn't get flushed except during shutdown, that i'm sure of
18:48 <yashraj> hmm, right when I shut down the node I saw a temp file like mempool.dat.new or something for a sec then the file size bumped to 94MB
18:53 <LarryRuane> that makes sense, it writes a new file and then renames it, in case the process (or entire system) crashes halfway through the writes
18:53 <LarryRuane> the way it's done prevents file corruption
{% endirc %}
