---
layout: pr
date: 2023-11-01
title: "Fee Estimator updates from Validation Interface/CScheduler thread"
pr: 28368
authors: [ismaelsadeeq]
components: ["tx fees and policy"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: past
commit: 79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13
---


## Notes

* The [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) is used to estimate what feerate a user should place on their transaction to be confirmed within a targeted number of blocks. RPCs [`estimaterawfees`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/rpc/fees.cpp#L100) and [`estimatesmartfees`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/rpc/fees.cpp#L29) can be used to obtain a feerate estimate for a given confirmation target. Fee estimation is also heavily used in the [wallet](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/wallet/fees.cpp#L29).

* Before this PR, [`CTxMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/22fa1f4702e9a60e141f545f8d09704deca34b22/src/txmempool.h#L301) owns a [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) as one of its members and, whenever a transaction is added or removed from the mempool in [`addUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L475), [`removedUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L787) and  [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) methods, it also updates the fee estimator synchronously.
 
* `removeForBlock` calls [`CBlockPolicyEstimator::processBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/106ab20f121f14d021725c8a657999079dbabfc1/src/policy/fees.h#L204C11-L204C11) to update the fee stats when transactions are removed from the mempool after a new block connection.

* Since `removeForBlock` is part of a series of function calls within [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13), block processing is blocked by fee estimator updates. Adding more steps to `CBlockPolicyEstimator::processBlock` can slow down block processing even further.

 *  `CValidationInterface` includes validation-related events such as addition of a transaction to the mempool [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99), the removal of a transaction from the mempool [`TransactionRemovedFromMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L133), the connection of a block to the chain [`BlockConnected`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L140), and others.

    * Subclasses of [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) are called subscribers or clients of `CValidationInterface`. They can implement the callbacks they need and must register with [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) using [`RegisterValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L26).
    Validation and mempool use [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) to "notify" subscribers of these events.

    * Depending on the event, the callbacks may be executed immediately or added to a queue of callbacks to be executed asynchronously on a different thread.

* PR [#28368](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368) removes `CTxMempool`'s' dependency on `CBlockPolicyEstimator` by making `CBlockPolicyEstimator` a client of `CValidationInterface`, instead of an internal component of `CTxMemPool`.

  * The PR makes `CBlockPolicyEstimator` update asynchronously in response to `CValidationInterface` events, which means updating the fee estimator no longer blocks block processing.

  * The PR also adds a new `CValidationInterface` callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is fired in [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).

  * The PR also modifies the `TransactionAddedToMempool` callback parameter from [`CTransactionRef`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/primitives/transaction.h#L421) to a new struct `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` which has `CTransactionRef` and other information the fee estimator needs such as the virtual size and fees.

* There has been an attempt at this PR [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775)

## Questions

### Conceptual

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

2. Why is it beneficial to remove `CTxMempool` dependency on `CBlockPolicyEstimator`?

3. Are there any benefits of the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` being a member of `CTxMempool`? Are there downsides to removing it?

4. The first attempt [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface` into `CValidationInterface` and `MempoolInterface`. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?

5. What do you think is better or worse about the approach taken in this approach, versus the one taken in [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface`?

6. Can you list the other subscribers to `CValidationInterface`?

7. Why is implementing a `CValidationInterface` method equivalent to "subscribing to the event"?

8. `BlockConnected` and `NewPoWValidBlock` are different callbacks. Which one is asynchronous and which one is synchronous? How can you tell?

### Code Review

{:start="9"}

9. In [`4986edb`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197), why are we adding a new callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` instead of using `BlockConnected`?

10. In [`1d116df`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b), is `kernel/mempool_entry.h` the right place for `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`? What members are included in this struct, and why are they necessary?

11. Why can't we use a `std::vector<CTxMempoolEntry>` as a parameter of `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` callback?

12. How can you get the base fee of a `CTransactionRef`?

13. In [`ab4e250`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ab4e250d1d209e0c79dba266461e6b0cfd670452#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522), is moving `removeTx` call to reason != `BLOCK` scope necessary? Is it fixing a bug?

14. Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with unconfirmed parents?

15. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L641), we pass a copy of transaction `parents`, `nSizeWithAncestors`, and `nModFeesWithAncestors` to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`. Is there a better approach to get all that information?

16. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13), why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635) of `removeForBlock`?

### Meeting 1

{% irc %}
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> #startmeeting
17:00 <kevkevin> hey guys
17:00 <willcl-ark> hi
17:00 <pablomartin> hello
17:00 <dberkelmans> hi
17:00 <stickies-v> hi
17:00 <maxedw> hi
17:00 <lightlike> Hi
17:00 <henmeh84> hi
17:01 <abubakarsadiq> welcome everyone! Today’s PR is #28368.
17:01 <abubakarsadiq> The notes and questions are available on https://bitcoincore.reviews/28368
17:01 <hernanmarino> Hello 
17:01 <abubakarsadiq> Anyone joining in for the first time?
17:02 <henmeh84> yes
17:02 <aaron> yes
17:02 <abubakarsadiq> Welcome @henmeh84 @aaron
17:02 <henmeh84> thank you. nice to be here
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> Did everyone get a chance to review the PR? How about a quick y/n from everyone
17:03 <aaron> thank you as well, very exited to be here
17:03 <willcl-ark> light y for me
17:03 <pablomartin> concept ack and trying to review the code while testing it at the moment... never been at this part of the code, very interesting and id like to dedicate more time to it. It seems there are a lot of benefits made by this change.
17:03 <hernanmarino> y. Light review, code review pending 
17:04 <kevkevin> I did very shortly
17:04 <stickies-v> mostly reviewed the notes/questions
17:04 <maxedw> y
17:04 <abubakarsadiq>  Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK? What was your review approach?
17:05 <abubakarsadiq> lets jump right in
17:05 <hernanmarino> Approach ACK 
17:05 <maxedw> Concept ACK
17:05 <abubakarsadiq>  Why is it beneficial to remove CTxMempool dependency on CBlockPolicyEstimator?
17:06 <BrinkingChancell> utACK 79bcc5
17:06 <maxedw> It seems like when there are changes to the mempool a synchronous update of the PolicyEstimator fires off
17:07 <willcl-ark> Currently block processing (and subsequently relaying new blocks to peers) is blocked while we update fee estimations based on the new block, which is not ideal.
17:07 <glozow> hi
17:07 <BrinkingChancell> hi
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> yes @maxedw @willcl-ark, in master CTxMemPool updates the CBlockPolicyEstimator synchronously
17:08 <pablomartin> willcl-ark +1 also would be very useful in order to test other fee estimators (/PRs)
17:08 <BrinkingChancell> agreed, that we can get improved asynchronous processing. In the previous architecture, updating the fee estimator was a synchronous task carried out within the `ConnectTip` function series
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> yes @BrnkingChancell #28368 will enable the fee estimator to update asynchronously in the background and stop blocking connectTip (block processing) during the fee estimator updates
17:10 <abubakarsadiq> Adding other complex fee estimation stuff during updates will be efficient.
17:11 <maxedw> Isn't it also run synchronously when a tx is added or removed from the mempool? That seems less of a problem to me than during a new block.
17:11 <abubakarsadiq> This brings us to the second question
17:11 <abubakarsadiq> 2. Are there any benefits of the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` being a member of `CTxMempool` ?  Are there downsides to removing it?
17:11 <maxedw> just a general thought on synchronous code being simpler
17:12 <maxedw> it's much easier to reason about and to write without error
17:12 <BrinkingChancell> agreed that synchronous code is easier to reason about
17:12 <maxedw> Also if things are processed in their own thread, do we have to worry about accessing the required memory to make the fee estimations?
17:13 <willcl-ark> the estimator does enjoy the transaction metadata the CTxMempoolEntry's have, fee, ancestor info etc.
17:13 <glozow> yeah you don't need to make copies of all the info you need
17:13 <abubakarsadiq> @maxedw yes its also synchronous on tx removal
17:16 <abubakarsadiq> @will-clark thats why we now have NewMempoolTransactionInfo struct to pass copies of all the info the fee estimator needs
17:18 <BrinkingChancell> The downsides to removing it include that we have more code to read, write, and reason about. The asynchronous way might also be considered more complex. For instance, there might now be greater risk of inconsistency while doing asynchronous fee estimates
17:18 <abubakarsadiq> @maxedw in #28368 the call is processed in `CSchedular` thread,  all the info the fee estimation need are passed in the callback parameter
17:18 <abubakarsadiq> The fee estimator has its own version of the mempool `mapMempoolTxs` it does not have to worry about accessing memory
17:20 <willcl-ark> BrinkingChancell:  That more depends on whether the validation interface guarantees ordering of callbacks (which AFAIU it does), so IMO there shouldn't be an inconsistency as such introduced here?
17:21 <abubakarsadiq> +1 willcl-ark
17:21 <BrinkingChancell> ahh, I see. that makes sense
17:22 <abubakarsadiq> Also the fee estimator will now have limited access to transaction data during updates, this is okay because the fee estimator doesn't require all that information.
17:23 <abubakarsadiq> 3. The first attempt #11775 split the CValidationInterface into CValidationInterface and MempoolInterface. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?
17:24 <maxedw> The `CValidationInterface` seemed to focus on `BlockConnected` / `UpdatedBlockTip` whereas the `MempoolInterface` was for txs added and removed from the mempool. I'm not totally clear on the advantage of the split but I read in your notes that notifications could come from difference places such as mempool vs validation code and so the split could facilitate that.
17:27 <abubakarsadiq> @maxedw yes,  `CValidationInterface` callback notifications are fired from validation events such as block connection.
17:27 <abubakarsadiq> whereas `MempoolInterface` callback notifications are fired from mempool events such as adding/removing or transactions in the mempool
17:27 <BrinkingChancell> I had a similar understanding to maxedw.
17:27 <BrinkingChancell> I also had a question about this. Howcome it's not called `CMempoolInterface`? Do the class names follow different naming conventions for a technical reason? or is it something else?
17:28 <abubakarsadiq> The C is the legacy Hungarian naming convention used before
17:28 <maxedw> If it was going to be any prefix, I would have thought I for Interface
17:28 <maxedw> but it seems quite an old school microsofty thing to do
17:28 <maxedw> we used to do it in VB6 back in the day
17:30 <abubakarsadiq> see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/developer-notes.md#coding-style-c
17:30 <abubakarsadiq> there is a disclaimer not to use that anymore
17:31 <abubakarsadiq> 4 What do you think is better or worse about the approach taken in this approach, versus the one taken in #11775 split the `CValidationInterface`?
17:31 <maxedw> the current approach is less code and perhaps a bit simpler?
17:32 <maxedw> but if these really are two concepts coming from two different places and they had started life as two things, would people recommend bringing them together?
17:32 <willcl-ark> Whilst it seems nice organisationally to split them, as mentioned in the original commit message they still had a shared backend (to remain well-ordered), and it doesn't seem to offer much practical benefit to split: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775/commits/ae5e07196cd2693fbac601b68038cabc072eceac
17:33 <abubakarsadiq> @maxedw yes the code evolves since #11775, some of the changes have already been implemented, and this change is minimally scoped to making fee estimator update asynchronously in the background
17:33 <abubakarsadiq> +1 willcl-ark
17:33 <maxedw> minimal scope must help with getting it merged
17:33 <willcl-ark> ISTM like either approach could be taken in the long run, but as abubakarsadiq says this keeps the change as small as possible
17:34 <abubakarsadiq> 5. Can you list the other subscribers to `CValidationInterface`?
17:35 <maxedw> It was used in a few places, `mining.cpp` for BlockChecked and also in `NotificationsProxy`, `PeerManager` and `BaseIndex`.
17:36 <abubakarsadiq> +1 with `CZMQNotificationInterface`
17:36 <willcl-ark> Does the ZMQ interface rely on it? Not sure, but a few other managers e.g. PeerManager and some Indexes I guess?
17:37 <BrinkingChancell> I got BlockConnected, BlockDisconnected, UpdatedBlockTip, BlockChecked, NewPoWValidBlock, submitblock_StateCatcher, TestSubscriber, TestSubscriberNoop, OutpointsUpdater, TransactionsDelta, CZMQNotificationInterface
17:37 <BrinkingChancell> but not terribly confident in this answer
17:37 <BrinkingChancell> what's the best approach to find all subscribers to an interface?
17:37 <abubakarsadiq>  BlockConnected, BlockDisconnected, UpdatedBlockTip, BlockChecked, NewPoWValidBlock this are `CValidationInterface` callbacks
17:38 <abubakarsadiq> @willcl-ark `CZMQNotificationInterface` is a client of `CValidationInterface` AFAIU
17:39 <abubakarsadiq> @BrinkingChancell hint: find all subclasses of  `CValidationInterface`
17:41 <abubakarsadiq> this brings us to a similar question
17:41 <abubakarsadiq>  6. Why is implementing a `CValidationInterface` method equivalent to “subscribing to the event”
17:42 <maxedw> I didn't get to the bottom of that. I can see that a list of callbacks are kept and I know there is this scheduler thread but exactly how the whole thing hangs together I didn't get to.
17:43 <vmammal> 6. i also found this one challenging to articulate
17:45 <abubakarsadiq> All subclasses of  `CValidationInterface` are clients .  the subclass can implement `CValidationInterface` methods (callbacks)
17:45 <abubakarsadiq> Any implemented `CValidationInterface` method from a `CValidationInteface` subclass will be executed every time the method callback is fired using `CMainSignals`.
17:45 <abubakarsadiq> Callbacks are fired whenever the corresponding event occurs. check in `src/validation.cpp` and `src/txmempool.cpp`
17:47 <willcl-ark> that makes sense
17:47 <abubakarsadiq> specifically e.g https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/eca2e430acf50f11da2220f56d13e20073a57c9b/src/txmempool.cpp#L504C16-L504C16
17:47 <maxedw> I'm not fully there yet on that one, will have to read the code a bit more
17:49 <maxedw> in my mind the subclasses are their own objects so I don't really get how something knows to call them
17:49 <willcl-ark> So you subclass CValidationInterface, override the methods you want callbacks for, and then register you interface to be called back every time that event fires from a signal?
17:49 <maxedw> I think it's that register step I'm missing
17:49 <abubakarsadiq> Another thing to note is that The callbacks can either be executed synchronously or asynchronously depending on the callback whenever they are fired
17:50 <abubakarsadiq> @maxedw I added a point about the subscription in the notes I think
17:51 <maxedw> thank you I will have a read
17:52 <abubakarsadiq> `7. BlockConnected` and `NewPoWValidBlock` are different callbacks. Which one is asynchronous and which one is synchronous? How can you tell?
17:53 <maxedw> `BlockConnected` is asynchronous. I know this because that's what the comment said :p
17:53 <BrinkingChancell> same!
17:54 <willcl-ark> as good-a-way to find an answer as any I've heard.
17:54 <maxedw> the method signatures looked quite similar so I couldn't tell much from that
17:54 <abubakarsadiq> what about `NewPoWValidBlock`
17:55 <BrinkingChancell> the `BlockConnected` function has a lambda expression that is passed to an event queuing mechanism
17:55 <abubakarsadiq> +1 bingo
17:56 <abubakarsadiq> All asynchronous callbacks have a docstring indicating that they are executed in the background. 
17:56 <abubakarsadiq> Furthermore, it goes down to the way the callback `CMainSignals` in `validationinterface.cpp` method is defined, all synchronous callbacks are executed while asynchronous callbacks are added to the processing queue to be executed asynchronously by the `CSchedular` thread while the thread that fired the event continues its execution.
17:56 <abubakarsadiq> see the difference between https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/d53400e75e2a4573229dba7f1a0da88eb936811c/src/validationinterface.cpp#L260 and https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/d53400e75e2a4573229dba7f1a0da88eb936811c/src/validationinterface.cpp#L227
17:56 <pablomartin> ah!
17:56 <abubakarsadiq> `NewPoWValidBlock` is synchronous
17:57 <BrinkingChancell> `NewPoWValidBlock` is synchronous. There is no mention of callbacks, promises, async/await patterns..
17:57 <maxedw> the one calls `ENQUEUE_AND_LOG_EVENT` and the other doesn't
18:00 <willcl-ark> So net_processing::PeerManager is the only one using synchronous version, for better relay performance?
18:00 <abubakarsadiq> #endmeeting

### Meeting 2

17:00 <abubakarsadiq> #startmeeting
17:00 <maxedw> hi
17:00 <pablomartin> hello
17:00 <stickies-v> hi
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> hello everyone! welcome back to the second meeting about PR #28368. The notes and yesterday's discussion can be found at https://bitcoincore.reviews/28368.
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> We will be discussing the code review questions.
17:02 <maxedw> happy to be back, think I will be doing more reading and learning on this half
17:02 <abubakarsadiq> Lets jump right in to the next question
17:02 <abubakarsadiq> 9. In 4986edb, why are we adding a new callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` instead of using `BlockConnected`?
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197 commit link
17:03 <maxedw> Is it because it returns the removed transactions directly and not a block?
17:03 <abubakarsadiq> yes @maxedw 
17:04 <maxedw> does the block have those too?
17:04 <pablomartin> the removal of the txs is happening before (on BlockConnected), so you get the size of them also
17:04 <abubakarsadiq> and also vtx does not have some transaction details like base fee.
17:04 <abubakarsadiq> It will not be desirable to modify `CBlock` vtx entries to include details we need for fee estimation.
17:05 <maxedw> understood
17:06 <abubakarsadiq> pablomartin: I dont think the order matters for fee estimator stats, it just needs the list of the transactions and fee details with the height they are/going to be removed from the mempool.
17:07 <abubakarsadiq> after new block is connected probably
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> it also needs to know when transactions are removed for other reasons apart from `BLOCK` 
17:08 <pablomartin> i see... i thought MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock was triggered after the txs were removed from the mempool... when BlockConnected... no?
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> it is triggered before removal with the mempool transactions that are going to be removed. 
17:09 <pablomartin> oh right...
17:09 <pablomartin> makes sense
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> next question
17:09 <abubakarsadiq> In https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b, is `kernel/mempool_entry.h` the right place for `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`? What members are included in this struct, and why are they necessary?
17:10 <glozow> hi
17:11 <maxedw> TransactionRef, FeeAmount, VirtualTransactionSize and TxHeight are the members which I assume are needed for the estimation
17:12 <maxedw> I don't know if it's appropriate in `mempool_entry.h`
17:12 <pablomartin> regarding the right place for the struct... I thought due to CTxMemPoolEntry was there... and other mempool_* dont seem to be proper ones... not sure
17:13 <abubakarsadiq> I am thinking maybe NewMempoolTransactionInfo should be moved to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` to `policy/fees.h` but there are changes needed now after glozow review, will split the struct for transaction addition and removal
17:14 <pablomartin> and src/txmempool.cpp?
17:15 <abubakarsadiq> but overall I think `kernel/mempool_entry.h` is the right place for now
17:16 <glozow> Wouldn't you have a circular dependency if you moved them to policy/fees?
17:16 <aaron> hello
17:17 <abubakarsadiq> yes @glozow, kernel/mempool_entry.h seems the best place for it
17:17 <glozow> makes sense to me
17:17 <abubakarsadiq> 11. Why can’t we use a `std::vector<CTxMempoolEntry>` as a parameter of `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` callback?
17:18 <pablomartin> oh sorry, said nonsense... that was the proper mempool.. :$
17:20 <abubakarsadiq> We only need a few of the fields in `CTxMempoolEntry`, why make a copy of the whole object `CTxMempoolEntry`
17:21 <maxedw> and it can't be shared because it's fired off on a new thread?
17:22 <vmammal> my guess was that `CTxMempoolEntry` isn't in scope at the right time after decoupling the fee estimator from mempool, not sure though
17:22 <abubakarsadiq> Yes, has to be copied I think
17:25 <abubakarsadiq> Copying it  for all the transactions that are going to be removed from the mempool after a new block connection might not be efficient, hence we create `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` and copy all the fields the fee estimator needs.
17:25 <abubakarsadiq> 12. How can you get the base fee of a `CTransactionRef`?
17:27 <vmammal> naively, sum(inputs) minus sum(outputs) but i feel like that's not the answer you're going for
17:27 <maxedw> I might be way off here but does it have anything to do with  the `Workspace` struct?
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> +1 vmammal sum of inputs values - the sum of output values, the value of the inputs are not available in the `CTransactionRef` you get the inputs values using the inputs transaction hash and index number.
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> No helper method for this for `CTransactionRef` thats why we are making copy of the base fee
17:31 <abubakarsadiq> maxedw no does not have to do with `Workspace` struct.
17:32 <abubakarsadiq> 13. In https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ab4e250d1d209e0c79dba266461e6b0cfd670452#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522, is moving `removeTx` call to reason != `BLOCK` scope necessary? Is it fixing a bug?
17:35 <vmammal> i believe it is necessary
17:35 <vmammal> since tx are removed for block connected through another mechanism ?
17:36 <abubakarsadiq> yes, it is.
17:36 <abubakarsadiq> I wont say its a bug previously, because The reason why this passed before is that the fee estimator must have finished removing all txs whose reason is BLOCK before the mempool clears.
17:37 <abubakarsadiq> Any transaction whose removal reason is BLOCK will be removed by the fee estimator from the processBlock call in removeForBlock.
17:37 <abubakarsadiq> Having removeTx(hash, false); call outside reason != BLOCK is incorrect.
17:37 <abubakarsadiq> It is supposed to be in (reason != BLOCK) scope.
17:37 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/10199#discussion_r113795130
17:38 <abubakarsadiq> So the fix is necessary now with this PR.
17:39 <vmammal> good catch
17:40 <pablomartin> thanks for the link
17:40 <abubakarsadiq> 14. Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with unconfirmed parents?
17:40 <aaron> yes thanks for the link
17:41 <abubakarsadiq> aaron also see https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368#discussion_r1311941008
17:41 <aaron> will do thank you!
17:41 <vmammal> txs that are part of a package are evaluated on the ancestor fee of the package, so a single tx's fee isn't representative of the effective package rate
17:42 <abubakarsadiq> + vmammal the fee estimator is not package aware
17:42 <glozow> followup question: then should we ignore transactions with in-block children?
17:44 <abubakarsadiq> which means it only takes into account the transaction's actual fee rate always so transactions with mempool parents are suppossed to be tracked by their ancestor/mining score
17:44 <abubakarsadiq> good question glozow 
17:45 <vmammal> an unconfirmed tx with in-block children? im stumped
17:46 <glozow> Ah no. I mean when a transaction confirms, and has a child in the block
17:46 <pablomartin> if the fee estimator is not package aware... where the ancestor fee of package evaluation takes place?
17:46 <abubakarsadiq> no I think the question is asking should we track confirmed transactions in block that have children in that same block
17:47 <glozow> here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/7386da7a0b08cd2df8ba88dae1fab9d36424b15c/src/node/miner.cpp#L302
17:49 <abubakarsadiq> we should not track them as long as we confirm that they are added in that block because of their descendant fee. meaning they are a part of a package
17:49 <vmammal> i feel like yes, ignore the tx's fee if it has in-block children. but then we have the problem of fee estimator lacking sufficient data
17:49 <abubakarsadiq> But right now the fee estimator does that
17:52 <abubakarsadiq> vmammal some might have children but are not confirmed because of the child fee though
17:53 <abubakarsadiq> it is better to have less but accurate dat, than use inaccurate assumptions, pending to the time we make the fee estimator package aware
17:54 <vmammal> agreed
17:55 <abubakarsadiq> there is a PR that is attempting to do that with discussions going on
17:55 <abubakarsadiq> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25380
17:55 <abubakarsadiq> 15. In https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13, we pass a copy of transaction parents, `nSizeWithAncestors`, and `nModFeesWithAncestors` to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`. Is there a better approach to get all that information?
17:57 <vmammal> what other option do you have than to copy?
17:57 <abubakarsadiq> this fields are passed to fix silent merge conflict with #25380, but arent used in this PR anyway.
17:57 <abubakarsadiq> I think its best to leave them out untill when needed
17:58 <abubakarsadiq> nope vmammal
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> Two minutes
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> last question
17:59 <abubakarsadiq> 16. In https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13, why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the first loop of `removeForBlock`?
18:00 <abubakarsadiq> #endmeeting

{% endirc %}
