---
layout: pr
date: 2023-06-28
title: "Track mempool conflicts with wallet transactions"
pr: 27307
authors: [ishaanam]
components: ["wallet"]
host: ishaanam
status: past
commit: 0538ad7
---

## Notes
- In Bitcoin Core, every [wallet transaction](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/7f0b79ea132d22ad5212c1d3ff4325715ca5ac12/src/wallet/transaction.h#L160)
  has a [transaction state](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/7f0b79ea132d22ad5212c1d3ff4325715ca5ac12/src/wallet/transaction.h#L68) (detailed [here](https://gist.github.com/ishaanam/846adf3b453c3a85fe6e15c882c57ae0#types-of-tx-states)).
  These transaction states are part of how the wallet decides which
  transactions to allow the user to spend, and which transactions to
  count towards a user's balance.

- Wallet transaction states and conflicts were previously discussed in
  review club [#27145](/27145)

- When a transaction is `TxStateInactive`:
    - its inputs are considered spent, and
    - its outputs are not available to spend and don't count towards a
      user's balance

- When a transaction is `TxStateConflicted`:
    - its inputs are _not_ considered spent, and
    - its outputs are not available to spend and don't count towards a
      user's balance

- On master, wallet txs are only considered conflicted when the conflicting tx
  gets mined into a block. This means that if a transaction is only conflicted
  by a mempool tx, it is considered `TxStateInactive` instead. This can lead to
  [confusion](https://bitcoin-irc.chaincode.com/bitcoin-core-dev/2023-05-09#1683605157-1683612219;)
  amongst users, because the funds seem to briefly "disappear".

- This PR treats transactions with conflicts in the mempool as conflicted
  as well, by adding another [transaction state for mempool-conflicted
  transactions](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27307/files#diff-d41d68c5a65d67956c91b33ca86da7df1981d84a0b15b4a186deea566563fed5R46-R49)
  and keeping track of the conflicting transactions in
  [`MempoolConflicts`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27307/files#diff-9ce137cd784ea308778842120aa2af6d2bb8369485b71f25e72b2a32cf0a5b21R316-R318),
  a map of wallet tx hashes to a set of their mempool conflicts' tx
  hashes.

- This idea and a previous attempt to implement it is described
  [here](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/Wallet-Transaction-Conflict-Tracking#idea-mempool-conflicted)

## Questions
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or
NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)?
What was your review approach?

1. Is this PR fixing a bug or adding a feature? What is that
bug/feature?

1. What are the trade-offs with considering a mempool-conflicted
transaction as conflicted instead of inactive?

1. Is the first commit necessary for this PR? Does it change any
existing behavior?

1. What is the point of adding a `MempoolConflicts` map? Why can't the
wallet just check for conflicts in `mapTxSpends`?

1. What is the benefit of adding another transaction state
(`TxStateMempoolConflicted`) instead of just using `TxStateConflicted`?

1. Should a user be able to abandon a transaction with a mempool
conflict? With this PR is a user able to do so?

1. After a wallet is reloaded, what will be the transaction state of a
previously mempool-conflicted transaction?

1. Do the tests added to [`wallet_conflicts.py`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/0538ad7d4cfddb5a377f879cbf221b2b028c264a) fail on master for you?

1. This PR doesn't modify any of the balance calculation code directly,
so how do the changes made in this PR affect the balance calculation of
the wallet?xf

1. Are `TxStateConflicted` and `TxStateMempoolConflicted` transactions
treated the same in memory?

1. Are there any additional test cases you would like to see
implemented?

1. Why does `wallet_abandonconflict.py` need to be
modified in the [second commit](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/285d00523198ce352835d8360f8d79554b03bcd1)?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <ishaanam[m]> #startmeeting
17:00 <ishaanam[m]> Hey everyone, welcome to PR review club!
17:00 <LarryRuane> hi
17:00 <brunoerg> hi
17:00 <ishaanam[m]> Today we will be reviewing #27307: "Track mempool conflicts with wallet transactions"
17:00 <ishaanam[m]> The notes and questions can be found here: https://bitcoincore.reviews/27307
17:01 <Pins> hi
17:01 <kevkevin> hi
17:01 <ishaanam[m]> Feel free to ask any questions!
17:01 <ishaanam[m]> Has anyone gotten a chance to review the PR or look at the notes?
17:01 <evansmj> hey do scripted diffs normally come in an independent pr?  i think yes right?
17:02 <abubakarsadiq>  hello
17:02 <LarryRuane> One really basic question, is there a `CWalletTx` instance in memory for every tx that is either paying *to* this wallet or paying *from* this wallet? And both mined and unmined transactions?
17:03 <sipa> Yes, and yes.
17:03 <Pins> ishaanam[m] I did
17:03 <LarryRuane> evansmj: no, scripted diff is generally *one* commit within a larger PR
17:04 <ishaanam[m]> Great, can someone give a short summary of what this PR is doing?
17:05 <LarryRuane> ishaanam[m]: I was confused by the description of `TxStateConflicted` in the notes... its inputs are not spent (by another tx? and its outputs are not available to spend, for example immature coinbase? To me, that doesn't sounds "conflicted" ... so I must be missing something
17:05 <Pins> creating a new tx state to the mempool conflicted tx
17:07 <ishaanam[m]> LarryRuane: To clarify, that was not about what makes a transaction TxStateConflicted, it was about how a wallet treats a TxStateConflicted transaction
17:08 <LarryRuane> oh i see, thanks, that helps a lot
17:08 <abubakarsadiq> Solving an intermittent issue where mempool droped transaction are marked as TxStateConflicted, by creating a new state for mempool dropped transaction
17:08 <LarryRuane> i thought it was defining those states
17:10 <ishaanam[m]> LarryRuane: yes, I think there was some confusion about that earlier as well, I think I'll go back and clarify the notes
17:10 <LarryRuane> I still didn't understand (sorry, you can go on) exactly which event(s) causes funds (by which I think you mean balance) to briefly disappear? And which event(s) cause them to come back?
17:11 <LarryRuane> But as I said, you can go on if everyone else gets it :)
17:11 <ishaanam[m]> abubakarasdiq: while a new transaction state is created for mempool conflicted transactions, I don't think that mempool dropped transactions were ever marked as TxStateConflicted?
17:12 <ishaanam[m]> Also, I want to clarify that this new transaction state is only applied to transactions which are conflicted by another transaction in the mempool, not transactions which have been dropped without conflicts
17:13 <abubakarsadiq> thanks  
17:14 <BrandonOdiwuor> I think the PR tries to solve the issue of mempool conflicted transactions being treated as TxStateInactive by adding TxStateMempoolConflicted state
17:15 <ishaanam[m]> LarryRuane: Because the funds are marked as TxStateInactive when they are conflicted out of the mempool, the wallet will not show the outputs (the funds which disappear), but it will still consider the inputs as spent
17:15 <ishaanam[m]> BrandonOdiwuor: yes!
17:15 <LarryRuane> ishaanam[m]: +1 thanks
17:16 <ishaanam[m]> That being said, what are the trade-offs with considering a mempool-conflicted transaction as TxStateMempoolConflicted instead of TxStateInactive?
17:18 <ishaanam[m]> Meaning, is it more or less "safe", from a user's perspective
17:20 <abubakarsadiq> mempool-conflicted transaction inputs will no longer be considered as spent
17:20 <ishaanam[m]> Is it better to err on the side of caution and consider something as "spent" even if it technically is not, or consider something as "unspent" even though it's funds could potentially be spent (though not likely)?
17:21 <LarryRuane> considering something as spent that may not be seems like the more conservative view
17:21 <Pins> +1
17:22 <LarryRuane> and in bitcoin we like to be conservative 😄
17:22 <Pins> ;D
17:22 <ishaanam[m]> yes, that's true
17:23 <ishaanam[m]> What is the benefit of adding another transaction state (TxStateMempoolConflicted) instead of just using TxStateConflicted?
17:25 <evansmj> other wallets can differentiate between either mempool or block conflicts more clearly with the new state in transaction.h, and display it different or inform the user whats going on?
17:25 <BrandonOdiwuor> To distinguish between block conflicted and mempool conflicted transactions
17:25 <Pins> Diferentiate the kind of conflict
17:26 <ishaanam[m]> evansmj: BrandonOdiwuor: Pins: Yes, to make the distinction more clear.
17:27 <ishaanam[m]> There was a previous attempt at this PR where TxStateConflicted was used
17:27 <evansmj> does marking a tx as a mempool-conflict consider it "spent" or "unspent"?
17:27 <evansmj> vs inactive
17:27 <Pins> evansmj spent
17:29 <Pins> I'm not very sure
17:29 <ishaanam[m]> Also, because previously mempool-conflicted states were serialized differently, a new tx state was introduced to maintain this behavior
17:29 <ishaanam[m]> evansmj: Pins: Marking a tx as mempool-conflicted means that it's inputs are "unspent"
17:30 <Pins> ishaanam[m] Yes, sure ... thanks
17:30 <ishaanam[m]> The code for this is here: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27307/commits/2be57fea174b7079b86d3954413c7be1fd993db2#diff-69473389a98be9232528ccdef04f9fa51ce8c5558e64994e15589be924eebae3L259-R260
17:31 <LarryRuane> One thing that I found was pretty interesting, and I wasn't aware of, is `std::get_if` https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/d6ee03507f39223889a5f039c4db7204ddfb91d5/src/wallet/transaction.h#L314 ... that's some pretty advanced c++
17:31 <abubakarsadiq> whats the difference between mempool conficted and mempool dropped transactions?
17:32 <ishaanam[m]> After a wallet is reloaded, what will be the transaction state of a previously mempool-conflicted transaction?
17:32 <Pins> ishaanam[m] TxStateInactive
17:34 <ishaanam[m]> abubakarsadiq: the way I see it is that mempool conflicted transactions are a subset of mempool dropped transactions. 
17:34 <abubakarsadiq> in master TxStateInactive, with this pr TxStateMempoolConflicted
17:34 <ishaanam[m]> mempool dropped transactions could have been dropped for some reason other than being conflicted
17:35 <evansmj> after a wallet reload will it go through WalletBatch::LoadWallet() which will start everything over again, or will it do the mapWallet check when a wallet is 'reloaded'?
17:35 <ishaanam[m]> For example, they could have been dropped from the mempool because of size-limiting 
17:36 <ishaanam[m]> Pins: yes
17:37 <ishaanam[m]> abubakarsadiq: Because this PR doesn't change how mempool-conflicted transactions are serialized, and previously they would be considered TxStateInactive, it is still TxStateInactive
17:39 <ishaanam[m]> evansmj: it won't go through the mapTxSpends check that it does during `transactionAddedToMempool` and `transactionRemovedFromMempool`, if that's what you mean
17:40 <ishaanam[m]> Come to think of it, there should be a test for reloading a wallet with a mempool-conflicted transaction
17:40 <ishaanam[m]> Speaking of tests, has anyone tried running the added tests on master?
17:41 <evansmj> so just copy paste the new tests to master and make sure they fail?
17:42 <ishaanam[m]> evansmj: You could do that, or you could run git cherry-pick 0538ad7d4cfddb5a377f879cbf221b2b028c264a(the test commit hash) so that only the commit with the tests gets added to your master branch
17:43 <abubakarsadiq> evansmj: or can just run the test without compiling the pr
17:43 <abubakarsadiq> thanks ishaanam
17:45 <ishaanam[m]> Are there any additional test cases that you would like to see implemented?
17:49 <ishaanam[m]> What about the first commit of this PR, does it change any existing behavior? 
17:50 <ishaanam[m]> This is the commit that I'm referring to: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/27307/commits/2be57fea174b7079b86d3954413c7be1fd993db2
17:54 <evansmj> makes CachedTxIsTrusted() use the new tx state instead of checking tx depth
17:55 <evansmj> same for IsTxInMainChain()
17:55 <LarryRuane> I don't think that commit changed behavior. You could run the existing tests on just that commit and see if any fail. If none fail, this *may* be a behavior non-change. (I guess you still can't be sure.)
17:57 <ishaanam[m]> evansmj: yes, there were multiple places that used the depth instead of just checking the state
17:58 <ishaanam[m]> LarryRuane: Yes, this commit is interesting because it is technically just a refactor, but this PR won't work without it. This is because it changed the balance calculation by modifying IsSpent.
17:58 <ishaanam[m]> If depth was still used, then mempool-conflicted transactions would have a depth of 0, so their inputs would be considered as spent.
18:59 <LarryRuane> +1 makes sense 
18:00 <ishaanam[m]> It looks like an hour is up
18:00 <ishaanam[m]> thanks everyone for coming!
18:00 <ishaanam[m]> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
