---
layout: pr
date: 2024-03-27
title: "Testing Bitcoin Core 27.0 Release Candidates"
authors: [cbergqvist, tdb3, davidgumberg, marcofleon]
components: ["tests"]
host: cbergqvist
status: past
commit:
---

## Notes

- Major versions of Bitcoin Core are released every 6-8 months. See the [Life
  Cycle documentation](https://bitcoincore.org/en/lifecycle/) for full details.

- When all of the PRs for a release have been merged, _Release Candidate 1_
  (rc1) is tagged. The rc is then tested. If any issues are found, fixes are
  merged into the branch and a new rc is tagged. This continues until no major
  issues are found in an rc, and that rc is then considered to be the final
  release version.

- To ensure that users don't experience issues with the new software, it's
  essential that the rcs are thoroughly tested. This special review club
  meeting is for people who want to help with that vital review process.

- This [Bitcoin Core Release Candidate Testing
  Guide](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide) provides guidance for testing the release candidate.

  - It is recommended to go through the "Preparation" steps ahead of the meeting, especially if you want to compile from source. Verify and confirm the successful installation of v27rc1, as well as v25.1 and v26 (older versions are used in some of the tests). BDB support is required in one of the tests.

  - The testing guide relies on the tools `jq` which are not installed by default on each platform. For example on macOS, you can install these ahead of time using `brew install`. Alternatively, you can also modify the instructions to avoid using these tools as they are not strictly necessary and/or can be replaced by other tools.

  - For some of the tests, you might want to have the [signet](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Signet) chain fully synced beforehand, so that you can just copy the signet directory into `/tmp/27-rc-test/` every time you run a test in a fresh environment.

- The guide is just to get you started on testing, so feel free to read the [Release Notes](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Notes-Draft)
  and bring ideas of other things you'd like to test!

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <cbergqvist> #startmeeting
17:00 <stickies-v> hi
17:00 <tdb3> hi
17:00 <dzxzg> hi
17:00 <marcofleon> Hi
17:00 <ion-> hi!
17:00 <vostrnad> hi
17:00 <glozow> hi
17:00 <Jamal> hi
17:00 <cbergqvist> Hello everyone! Welcome to another Bitcoin Core PR Review Club session.
17:00 <mayrf> hi
17:00 <cbergqvist> Today we are going to be testing the upcoming 27.0 release, following this guide:
17:00 <abubakarsadiq> hello
17:00 <cbergqvist> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide
17:01 <marcofleon> woo!
17:01 <cbergqvist> For newcomers (and just as a reminder), its encouraged to just blurt out questions! No need to ask for permission first or worry about if you're interrupting another question.
17:01 <Guest79> hi
17:01 <cbergqvist> Please open the testing guide linked above and prepare for an hour of testing, education, and attempts at breaking ₿itcoin! 💥😄
17:01 <edilmedeiros> hi
17:01 <Guest70> hey all!
17:02 <cbergqvist> It was suggested to go through the “Preparation” section ahead of the meeting.
17:02 <cbergqvist> If you haven't, this is the time to download/compile the binaries, as per https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#preparation
17:03 <cbergqvist> If you are set up already, please continue through the guide and report back if you run into weird results/stumbling blocks.
17:03 <cbergqvist> First though, could you please share which OS you're using and whether you have/are compiling from source using tags/v27.0rc1 or only using pre-compiled binaries?
17:03 <cbergqvist> NixOS v23.11 / Bitcoin Core v27.0rc1 from source, v25.1 and v26.0 pre-compiled.
17:03 <b10c> hi
17:04 <dzxzg> Fedora 39, I've built v27 from source, and I'm using release binaries for versions 25 and 26
17:04 <ion-> macos 14.3.1 (23D60) / Bitcoin Core v27.0rc1 from source, v25.1 and v26.0 pre-compiled.
17:04 <edilmedeiros> MacOS Sonoma 14.4 (dependencies installed with MacPorts instead of Brew) / Bitcoin Core v27.0rc1 from source, v25.1 and v26.0 pre-compiled.
17:04 <stickies-v> MacOS 14.3.1, gonna test precompiled bins today
17:04 <Jamal> macos 12.6.7 pre-compiled binaries too
17:04 <Guest63> PopOS 22.04 all precompiled
17:05 <mayrf_> nixos precompiled
17:05 <marcofleon> macOS 14.2 v27.0rc1 from source, 25.1 and 26.0 pre compiled
17:05 <abubakarsadiq> macOS 14.1.1/  built from source/ will test the v27r1 new features
17:05 <glozow> Ubuntu jammy, from source
17:06 <cbergqvist> Remember that the testing guides are meant to be a *starting point* to get you started with testing.
17:06 <cbergqvist> Most of the individual changes are well tested during the review phase, when the code is introduced to the codebase. What's more complicated to test is how changes behave together on different configurations and user patterns. Therefore it's encouraged to do your own testing and experiments. Testing on Mainnet is encouraged when possible.
17:07 <cbergqvist> Please report your test findings under this issue: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/29697
17:07 <cbergqvist> For feedback on the content of the guide itself please use: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/29685
17:08 <cbergqvist> (But of course you can/should take the opportunity to report stuff you encounter here in the chat too).
17:09 <cbergqvist> If you are encountering issues getting set up, please let us know here and we'll try to help.
17:12 <edilmedeiros> I just stumbled on v27 asking for credentials to use the CLI that was not happening in the morning. I'll check if I missed something.
17:13 <stickies-v> cbergqvist: should we ask conceptual questions about the changes tested here too, if any?
17:13 <tdb3> edilmedeiros, it would be good to check the DATA_DIR_x env vars
17:13 <dzxzg> @edilmedeiros Did you bcli stop at the end of your previous session
17:13 <tdb3> Was it complaining about the cookie not being available?
17:14 <cbergqvist> stickies-v: yeah, let's try that
17:14 <edilmedeiros> Yes, cookie not available
17:14 <edilmedeiros> For the v2 transport section
17:14 <edilmedeiros> datadirs were clean
17:14 <dzxzg> your bitcoind is probably still running and you'll have to kill it from your process manager
17:15 <ion-> "mempool.dat v1/v2 compatibility" re-tested ok
17:15 <dzxzg> SIGINT causes bitcoind to shut down gracefully afaik
17:16 <dzxzg> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/11586#issuecomment-341737656
17:17 <edilmedeiros> Yes, killing it manually solved
17:17 <cbergqvist> If people have prepared and are waiting for a goahead to start running tests, this is it. :)
17:17 <cbergqvist> First test is the aforementioned mempool format change.
17:18 <cbergqvist> https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#mempooldat-v1v2-compatibility
17:18 <cbergqvist> This change makes it less likely for antivirus software to quarantine your mempool.dat file if a malicious transaction containing byte patterns classified as a virus enters your mempool.
17:19 <Guest86> wow cool
17:19 <Jamal> Finished testing mempool.dat v1/v2 compatibility
17:19 <Jamal> Test Ok
17:21 <ion-> "v2 Transport on by Default" re-tested ok
17:21 <mayrf_> Why would this quarantining happen? If an antivirus intentionally wants wants to mess with your node? 
17:22 <tdb3> Antivirus software detects patterns associated with malicious code/files.  It then can automatically quarantine files that match these patterns.
17:22 <edilmedeiros> retested mempool v1/v2 comp and v2 transport on by default
17:22 <dzxzg> Some types of scripts, including OP_RETURN outputs, allow including arbitrary data in transactions
17:22 <tdb3> This disrupts Bitcoin Core's usage of the mempool.dat
17:22 <dzxzg> Including data that matches signatures in antivirus DB's, creates a DOS vector
17:23 <mayrf_> I see, thanks for explaining
17:23 <stickies-v> FYI when chaining commands after starting bitcoind, you can use `-daemonwait` instead of `-daemon` so the command doesn't return until the node is ready to be used, which is useful e.g. in the mempool v1/v2 tests
17:23 <tdb3> Previously, Bitcoin Core would store this data directly from transactions (which as dzxzg said, can contain arbitrary data from others).
17:23 <stickies-v> `bitcoind-test -daemonwait` instead of `bitcoind-test -daemon`
17:23 <tdb3> excellent idea
17:24 <tdb3> I'll make that change in the repo
17:24 <abubakarsadiq> https://www.irccloud.com/pastebin/pI03cpR1/
17:24 <Guest86> is this XORing logically happening after datacarrier=0 / permitbaremultisig=0 work to remove stuff from the mempool, or after ?
17:24 <mayrf_> Test ok
17:24 <ion-> "netinfo backward compatibility with pre-v26 nodes" re-tested ok
17:25 <Guest86> *sorry meant to say "... , or before" *
17:25 <abubakarsadiq> v2 Transport is working by default.
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>  ```./src/bitcoin-cli getnetworkinfo
17:25 <abubakarsadiq> {
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   "version": 270000,
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   "subversion": "/Satoshi:27.0.0/",
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   "protocolversion": 70016,
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   "localservices": "0000000000000c09",
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   "localservicesnames": [
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>     "NETWORK",
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>     "WITNESS",
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>     "NETWORK_LIMITED",
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>     "P2P_V2"
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   ],
17:25 <abubakarsadiq>   ```
17:26 <dzxzg> @abubakarsadiq is that after you've connected to the seed node or after you've made the manual `addnode` connection to the v2 peer
17:26 <edilmedeiros> "netinfo backward compatibility with pre-v26 nodes" went ok
17:26 <abubakarsadiq> Normal startup, So far I am not connected to any v2 peer, after I did `getpeerinfo`.
17:26 <abubakarsadiq> Any v2 peer I can connect with manually :)
17:27 <stickies-v> Guest86: this is about dumping your mempool to disk, so it would only affect stuff that's in your mempool, and not the stuff you're filtering out through policy, because it doesn't get into your mempool
17:27 <cbergqvist> Guest86: if you reject OP_RETURN data it will probably not get into your mempool.dat to be XORed, no. But there may be other ways of inscribing data..
17:27 <dzxzg> The v2 seednode won't necessarily gossip v2 peers to you, but you can inspect debug.log to see that the `addrfetch` connection was made over v2
17:27 <Naiyoma> "mempool.dat v1/v2 compatibility" Test Ok
17:27 <stickies-v> mempool.dat v1/v2 test successful 👍
17:29 <glozow> abubakarsadiq: I'll dm you an address
17:29 <dzxzg> mempool.dat v1/v2 test worked
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> Thanks, so far from debug.log
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> ```
17:29 <abubakarsadiq>  [net] start sending v2 handshake to peer=11
17:29 <abubakarsadiq>  [net] socket closed for peer=11
17:29 <abubakarsadiq>  [net] disconnecting peer=11
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> [net] retrying with v1 transport protocol for peer=11
17:29 <abubakarsadiq> ```
17:32 <cbergqvist> The second test which some are already running is "v2 Transport on by Default" - https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#v2-transport-on-by-default
17:32 <cbergqvist> This enables encrypted communication by default, even on IPv4/IPv6.
17:33 <cbergqvist> Problem is just finding nodes supporting it. :)
17:33 <dzxzg> @abubakarsadiq, do you have anything like: 
17:33 <dzxzg> 2024-03-16T17:15:05Z New addr-fetch v2 peer connected: version: 70016, blocks=187042, peer=0
17:33 <dzxzg> in your debug.log? AFAIK it is expected that we attempt a v2 connection to peers first before reattempting as v1
17:34 <glozow> oh, are you on signet?
17:35 <dzxzg> Yes
17:35 <abubakarsadiq> No am on mainnet 
17:35 <dzxzg> Oh
17:35 <stickies-v> cbergqvist: hopefully, after releasing v27 automatically peering with v2 nodes should be more frequent 🤞
17:36 <abubakarsadiq> dzxzg: nothing like that
17:36 <cbergqvist> v26 nodes do support v2, but it's not enabled by default as I understand it. Will they reject v2 attempt by default, or is it just that they will try v1 first when initiating?
17:38 <Jamal> "v2 Transport on by Default" test successful
17:38 <mayrf_> "v2 Transport on by Default" test ok
17:39 <ion-> "v3 Transaction Policy" re-tested ok
17:39 <lightlike> cbergqvist: v26 nodes only support v2 connections if they are started with the  -v2transport option. If that option isn't used, they will reject v2 connections.
17:40 <dzxzg> @abubakarsadiq I have not verified if achow's mainnet node is v2, but the signet node is
17:41 <cbergqvist> lightlike: thanks, will be hard to find random peers on mainnet with it enabled then.
17:42 <cbergqvist> Next test: https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/27.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide#netinfo-backward-compatibility-with-pre-v26-nodes
17:43 <cbergqvist> Slightly more minor change, client/server version compatibility fix.
17:44 <mayrf_> "netinfo backward compatibility with pre-v26 nodes" test successful
17:45 <achow101> dzxzg: all of my nodes have v2 enabled
17:47 <edilmedeiros> "v3 Transaction Policy" ok
17:47 <ion-> "CoinGrinder coin selection algorithm" re-tested ok
17:48 <Naiyoma> "v2 Transport on by Default" Test Ok
17:49 <dzxzg> abubakarsadiq: did you run your mainnet node with `dnsseed=0` and `fixedseeds=0`
17:51 <dzxzg> for the v2 test (if you're still on that test, if not no worries )
17:51 <cbergqvist> just tested with what dzxzg suggested + rm ~/.bitcoin/peers.dat + anchors.dat, started bitcoind, then used bitcoin-cli addnode bitcoin.achow101.com add
17:51 <abubakarsadiq> no I did normal ./configure and ./src/bitcoind to see if I will get a V2 peer in the wild.
17:52 <abubakarsadiq> But I connected successfully to a V2 peer from glozow 
17:53 <dzxzg> oh I see, my mistake
17:53 <Jamal> "v3 Transaction Policy" test Ok
17:54 <edilmedeiros> coingrinder test ok. Quite impressive to see such a big transaction, it was never a use case for me.
17:56 <mayrf_> "v3 Transaction Policy" test successful
17:57 <ion-> "migratewallet RPC is no longer experimental" re-tested ok
17:57 <ion-> Completed all tests - ok
17:58 <marcofleon> edilmedeiros Agreed, it was cool for me to see too. Having something like coingrinder in core just makes sense with fees getting higher
17:59 <cbergqvist> Thanks everyone for joining and testing! Please continue to see if you can break the release. :)
17:59 <edilmedeiros> " migratewallet RPC is no longer experimental" ok
17:59 <edilmedeiros> Completed all tests
17:59 <tdb3> Thanks everyone
17:59 <edilmedeiros> Thanks everyone
18:00 <ion-> That was fun again!
18:00 <edilmedeiros> I'll put some more time trying to break things.
18:00 <Naiyoma> "v3 Transaction Policy" Test Ok
18:00 <cbergqvist> (Meeting format inspired by kouloumos (https://bitcoincore.reviews/v24-rc-testing))
18:00 <cbergqvist> #endmeeting
{% endirc %}
