---
layout: pr
date: 2024-08-07
title: "Add PayToAnchor(P2A), OP\_1 <0x4e73> as standard output script for spending"
pr: 30352
authors: [instagibbs]
components: ["tx fees and policy"]
host: glozow
status: past
commit: 67c3537f75bcf085bb98e3830649e93da124cb06
---

## Notes

- Lightning Network (LN) commitment transactions may use [anchor outputs](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/anchor-outputs/) to allow channel
  participants to fee-bump the presigned transactions through Child Pays For Parent (CPFP) at broadcast time. The current design (see [BOLT
  3](https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/03-transactions.md#to_local_anchor-and-to_remote_anchor-output-option_anchors))
  has a few limitations described in [this blog post](https://bitcoinops.org/en/blog/waiting-for-confirmation/#policy-as-an-interface).

    - The most relevant point here is the fact that the anchors currently specify a p2wsh script including two spending
      paths: using the party's funding key, or anyone 16 blocks after the transaction confirms. Spending this anchor
      output requires paying fees for a relatively large amount of data. We call these anchors keyed because of the
      presence of a key in the locking script.

    - Assuming there are no reasons to use keyed anchor outputs (there are, but that is out of scope for this review club), a keyless
      anchor may reduce complexity (including for a [watchtower](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/watchtowers/)) and make fee-bumping more space and fee-efficient.

- [Ephemeral Anchors](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/ephemeral-anchors/) enable a new pattern for adding fees to
  presigned transactions, with a few key improvements:

    - The anchor output can have any `nValue`, including amounts below the dust threshold such as 0, as long as it is
      spent immediately, i.e. relayed in a package with a fee-bumping child. Implementing this policy requires ensuring that the anchor is always
      spent after subsequent mempool updates, so it is only implemented for [TRUC transactions](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/version-3-transaction-relay/) which are restricted to a very simple topology. This portion of the
      proposal was split into its own "ephemeral dust" PR, [#30239](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30239).

    - The anchor output is "keyless" or "anyone-can-spend", reducing the amount of data (and thus fees) needed in the
      CPFP transaction, and making it easier for watchtowers to help broadcast presigned transactions. This part of the
      proposal, [#30352](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30352), is independent of the "ephemeral dust"
      concept, and the implementation is simple regardless of transaction topology.

- While `scriptPubKey`s can be fairly freeform, Bitcoin Core enumerates several `TxoutType`s. These correspond to output
  types that you may be familiar with like `SCRIPTHASH` (P2SH), `WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH` (P2WPKH), `WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH`
  (P2WSH), and `NULL_DATA` (`OP_RETURN` or datacarrier).

    - [`Solver`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/24f86783c87e836c98404bcc20a07742736d6b56/src/script/solver.cpp#L141) pattern-matches `scriptPubKey`s to classify their output type; anything that does not fall into the known categories is `TxoutType::NONSTANDARD`.

    - By default, a transaction must pass standardness checks to be accepted to mempool. `IsStandardTx()`
      inspects the `TxoutType`s of each of the transaction's [inputs and outputs](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fa0b5d68823b69f4861b002bbfac2fd36ed46356/src/policy/policy.cpp#L111-L148), among other checks.

    - Notice the difference in rules applied to inputs and outputs. A particular output type may be
      nonstandard to create but standard to spend, and vice versa.

- This PR does two things: it defines `OP_1 <0x4e74>` as a new output type, and relaxes policy rules to make it standard
  to spend this output type, as long as the witness is empty.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. Before `TxoutType::ANCHOR` is defined in this PR, what `TxoutType` would a `scriptPubKey` `OP_1 <0x4e73>` be classified as? (Hint:
   what would [`Solver`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/24f86783c87e836c98404bcc20a07742736d6b56/src/script/solver.cpp#L141) return?)

1. Based on the answer to the previous question, would it be standard to create this output type? What about to spend it?
   (Hint: how do [`IsStandard`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fa0b5d68823b69f4861b002bbfac2fd36ed46356/src/policy/policy.cpp#L70) and [`AreInputsStandard`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/fa0b5d68823b69f4861b002bbfac2fd36ed46356/src/policy/policy.cpp#L177) treat this type?)

1. Before this PR, with default settings, which output types can be _created_ in a standard transaction? Is
   that the same as the script types that can be _spent_ in a standard transaction?

1. Define _anchor output_, without mentioning Lightning Network transactions (try to be more general).

1. The PR description [claims](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30352#issue-2378948027) that creation of the defined P2A output type is already standard prior to the PR. Is this true, and how did you verify this?

1. Why does the size of the output script of an anchor output matter?

1. What other ways can you think of to implement an 'anyone-can-spend' anchor?

1. Continuing on the previous question, what would be the problem with using `P2SH(OP_TRUE)`?

1. What is the difference between `OP_TRUE` and `OP_1`? (Hint: where are they defined in the code?)

1. How many virtual bytes are needed to create and spend a P2A output?

1. The 3rd commit [adds](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ccad5a5728c8916f8cec09e838839775a6026293#diff-ea6d307faa4ec9dfa5abcf6858bc19603079f2b8e110e1d62da4df98f4bdb9c0R228-R232) `if (prevScript.IsPayToAnchor()) return false` to `IsWitnessStandard`. What does this do, and why
   is it needed?

1. How is _witness program_ defined in [BIP141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#witness-program)? Where is it implemented in the code? (Hint: look for `IsWitnessProgram`)

1. `VerifyWitnessProgram` is modified to allow version 1, `<0x4e73>`, if `is_p2sh` is false. Why is `!is_p2sh` needed?

## Meeting Log

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <glozow> hi
17:00 <monlovesmango> hey
17:00 <instagibbs> hi (lurking only)
17:00 <vostrnad> hi
17:00 <codingp110> hi
17:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR Review Club! Feel free to say hi
17:00 <stickies-v> hi
17:01 <glozow> Today's PR is P2A: https://bitcoincore.reviews/30352
17:01 <glozow> Did everybody get a chance to review the PR or read through the notes?
17:01 <monlovesmango> yes
17:01 <stickies-v> yup
17:02 <glozow> Awesome. For those who reviewed, what was your review approach?
17:02 <emc99> hi
17:03 <monlovesmango> mostly just reviewed the code (as much as I could) and read through pr and some of other linked documentation
17:03 <glozow> monlovesmango: cool!
17:03 <glozow> Let's dive into the questions
17:03 <glozow> Before `TxoutType::ANCHOR` is defined in this PR, what TxoutType would a scriptPubKey OP_1 <0x4e73> be classified as?
17:04 <monlovesmango> TxoutType::WITNESS_UNKONWN I think
17:04 <stickies-v> yup that's my understanding too
17:04 <glozow> monlovesmango: yep!
17:05 <stickies-v> it's witness version 1 but not 32 bytes in size
17:05 <glozow> didn't need to give the hint, but here's the code: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/24f86783c87e836c98404bcc20a07742736d6b56/src/script/solver.cpp#L172-L176
17:05 <glozow> And would it be standard to create this output type (`WITNESS_UNKNOWN`)?
17:05 <monlovesmango> yes
17:06 <vostrnad> it's even been done already ;)
17:06 <instagibbs> *looks suspiciously at vostrnad*
17:06 <monlovesmango> XD
17:06 <glozow> indeed, do anyone have a block explorer link to that tx? I couldn't find it
17:06 <glozow> does*
17:07 <vostrnad> all 3 existing P2A UTXOs here: https://mempool.space/address/bc1pfeessrawgf
17:07 <glozow> Ok, what about to spend it? Would that have been standard? (before this PR)
17:07 <instagibbs> b10c0000004da5a9d1d9b4ae32e09f0b3e62d21a5cce5428d4ad714fb444eb5d
17:07 <monlovesmango> no
17:07 <glozow> monlovesmango: bonus points if you have a link to code :P
17:08 <glozow> (correct)
17:08 <monlovesmango> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/policy/policy.cpp#L188
17:08 <monlovesmango> ?
17:09 <instagibbs> that's one spot, there's another too(read hte comment)
17:10 <vostrnad> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1950
17:12 <glozow> vostrnad: nice
17:12 <glozow> Before this PR, with default settings, which output types can be created in a standard transaction?
17:12 <monlovesmango> haha i was not going to find that anytime soon...
17:13 <monlovesmango> PUBKEY, PUBKEYHASH, SCRIPTHASH, MULTISIG, NULL_DATA, WITNESS_V0_KEYHASH, WITNESS_V0_SCRIPTHASH, WITNESS_V1_TAPROOT, WITNESS_UNKNOWN
17:14 <vostrnad> correct
17:14 <glozow> monlovesmango: awesome yeah, more details at https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/e8eab747192bd330e67bff1222bb851bc515b134/src/policy/policy.cpp#L53-L74
17:14 <glozow> And as we've established, that's not the same as what can be spent in a standard tx
17:15 <glozow> Define anchor output, without mentioning Lightning Network transactions (ie try to be more general).
17:16 <monlovesmango> an extra output created on presigned transactions which allows fees to be added via CPFP at the time of broadcasting.
17:16 <glozow> monlovesmango: great definition 👍
17:17 <glozow> Not on the list, but can someone tell us the difference between a keyed and a keyless anchor? And why that matters?
17:17 <stickies-v> a keyless anchor doesn't contain a pubkey in its scriptpubkey, significantly reducing its on-chain footprint (and cost)
17:18 <glozow> stickies-v: yes, and anybody can spend it
17:18 <monlovesmango> I think keyless means that anyone can create a child for it (ie you don't need a specific key), which reduces the scriptPubkey size
17:19 <glozow> monlovesmango: yes anybody can spend it. it doesn't inherently make the onchain data smaller but it is true in this case
17:19 <glozow> for example you could have a p2wsh where one of several spending paths is something anybody can spend, which is larger
17:20 <glozow> Did anybody, while reviewing, try to verify that a P2A tx can be created but not spend in policy (before the PR)?
17:20 <glozow> Beyond code review I mean
17:20 <monlovesmango> was just about to ask about what case this wouldn't be true! thanks!
17:20 <monlovesmango> no
17:22 <vostrnad> instagibbs was, using Twitter as a broadcasting channel, doesn't seem to have worked
17:22 <glozow> current LN commitment transactions are a more concrete example https://github.com/lightning/bolts/blob/master/03-transactions.md#to_local_anchor-and-to_remote_anchor-output-option_anchors (there is a key, but since it is revealed, anybody can reconstruct the script)
17:22 <glozow> vostrnad: ah cool i didn't see that
17:22 <instagibbs> vostrnad ;(
17:23 <glozow> I was just suggesting you compile master, and then run the tests 😅
17:23 <glozow> Why does the size of the output script of an anchor output matter?
17:24 <vostrnad> the smaller the betterer?
17:24 <monlovesmango> the larger the anchor output size, the more fees you need to prioritize it to be relayed
17:25 <glozow> yeah pretty much
17:25 <instagibbs> smaller script also means min satoshi value to relay is smaller too
17:26 <glozow> also more efficient fee bumping = incentives to fee bump this way...
17:27 <glozow> What other ways can you think of to implement an ‘anyone-can-spend’ anchor?
17:27 <vostrnad> instagibbs: sure but policy can be changed any time, perhaps there could be a dust policy carve out for P2A as it's unusually cheap to spend
17:28 <monlovesmango> P2SH of OP_TRUE..?
17:28 <glozow> I suppose you could just implement GetDustThreshold for P2A for the same effect, no?
17:28 <glozow> monlovesmango: great! And why is that not as good as P2A?
17:28 <monlovesmango> bc it introduces transaction malleability
17:29 <monlovesmango> (which makes chained presigned transactions unreliable)
17:30 <glozow> monlovesmango: how would you malleate the tx?
17:31 <monlovesmango> i guess i am fuzzy on whether its a problem if there is only a single presigned tx. however if there were multiple presigned txs strung together, the miner could insert a OP_NOP in the scriptSig which would change the tx id
17:31 <monlovesmango> which would break the chain
17:32 <monlovesmango> (all taken from instagibbs pr comment https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30352#issuecomment-2228528366)
17:33 <instagibbs> fwiw p2sh requires push-only scriptsig, so I don't think the NOP thing works for p2sh, but cleanstack is the other thing
17:33 <glozow> it's also larger, no?
17:33 <instagibbs> yeh. p2sh(OP_DEPTH OP_NOT) might be txid stable? 
17:33 <instagibbs> (but ugh)
17:34 <glozow> wait what does OP_DEPTH do?
17:34 <monlovesmango> if there were only usecases for a single presigned tx, would there be any issue with P2SH?
17:34 <monlovesmango> (apart from maybe size..?)
17:34 <glozow> oh size of stack
17:35 <sipa> p2sh(OP_DEPTH OP_1 OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_1) maybe?
17:35 <sipa> eh
17:35 <sipa> p2sh(OP_DEPTH OP_0 OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_1) maybe?
17:35 <sipa> oh, OP_NOT, i misread it as OP_NOP; indeed!
17:35 <vostrnad> instagibbs: interesting, it never occurred to me you could make a non-malleable P2SH output like that
17:35 <instagibbs> so you could probably get smaller than P2WSH(OP_TRUE) and still be txid stable
17:36 <monlovesmango> what does push-only scriptsig mean? that you can only use OP codes that push onto the stack?
17:36 <sipa> monlovesmango: indeed, this is a BIP16 consensus rule
17:36 <instagibbs> vostrnad h/t jeremy, he proposed the bare version
17:36 <vostrnad> monlovesmango: scriptSig is actually a script that in legacy script can have non-push opcodes as well
17:37 <sipa> which likely was one day intended to support delegation, before the scriptSig/scriptPubkey execution split in 2010
17:37 <monlovesmango> got it thank you for all the background!!
17:37 <vostrnad> instagibbs: bare version is malleable though because no push-only
17:37 <instagibbs> vostrnad exactly 👍
17:38 <glozow> What is the difference between OP_TRUE and OP_1? (Hint: where are they defined in the code?)
17:39 <monlovesmango> but just to verify my understanding, its the spending tx that becomes malleable when using the bare version right?
17:39 <instagibbs> monlovesmango yes a miner can insert OP_NOP
17:40 <monlovesmango> awesome thanks
17:41 <abubakarsadiq> glozow: I think they are the same?
17:41 <vostrnad> "they're the same picture"
17:41 <glozow> abubakarsadiq: yes :D
17:41 <abubakarsadiq> `OP_TRUE=OP_1`
17:41 <glozow> What is the difference between OP_TRUE and OP_1? (Hint: where are they defined in the code?)
17:41 <glozow> oops wrong paste
17:41 <glozow> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/da083d4bbdb37737f5080fada97bd15f5a8bfb2d/src/script/script.h#L82-L83
17:42 <monlovesmango> haha tricky q
17:42 <Murch[m]> What’s OP_TRUE? Isn’t that just OP_1?
17:42 <glozow> it's a Q to get people out of lurking, it worked :P
17:42 <monlovesmango> heheheh
17:42 <glozow> How many virtual bytes are needed to create and spend a P2A output?
17:43 <glozow> that Q was designed to lure Murch here, but I see he's already appeared
17:43 <sipa> Murch[m]: I see your message as "What’s QOP_TRUE? Isn’t that just QOP_1?", what are those Qs?
17:43 — Murch[m] goes back into hiding
17:43 <glozow> backticks?
17:44 — Murch[m] uploaded an image: (7KiB) < https://matrix.bitcoin.ninja/_matrix/media/v3/download/matrix.org/OwgTaVVPBpxeysmEgKuIuRET/image.png >
17:44 <Murch[m]> Are you on IRC or Matrix?
17:44 <Murch[m]> But sorry, we are derailing
17:45 <Murch[m]> A keyless Anchor is 11 bytes, and the input would be 41 bytes?
17:45 <Murch[m]> s/bytes/vbytes/
17:46 <vostrnad> Murch[m]: I count 40.25 vbytes to spend, did you round down?
17:46 <vostrnad> *up
17:46 <Murch[m]> The input script length is a whole vbyte, right?
17:46 <Murch[m]> 32+4+4+1
17:47 <vostrnad> sorry, 41.25 vbytes (1 WU for the witness stack length)
17:47 <Murch[m]> Also it might only be 10 bytes for the output? Amount (8 B), output script length (1  B), OP_1 (1 B)
17:47 <Murch[m]> vostrnad: Sure, if you have other inputs with witnesses
17:48 <vostrnad> you better do!
17:48 <instagibbs> segwit.... but !HasWitness(), spooky
17:49 <vostrnad> I get 12 bytes for a P2A output, 8 bytes for amount and 4 bytes for output script
17:49 <vostrnad> wrong again, 13 (forgot output script length)
17:49 <instagibbs> :)
17:49 <vostrnad> these things are hard
17:49 <Murch[m]> Yeah
17:49 <Murch[m]> What do you have for the output script in detail?
17:50 <glozow> 51 02 4e 73 is 4 bytes yes?
17:50 <glozow> oh and 1
17:50 <Murch[m]> Oh, it’s witness output, not a bare output
17:50 <vostrnad> bare output would be malleable
17:50 <glozow> instagibbs: too spooky
17:51 <glozow> ok so we've landed on 13 + 41?
17:51 <sipa> woah, segwit output but !HasWitness() on the input is legal?
17:51 <sipa> i guess it's only the other way around that non-segwit output with HasWitness() is illegal?
17:51 <glozow> 9 more minutes, 3 more questions
17:51 <glozow> The 3rd commit adds `if (prevScript.IsPayToAnchor()) return false` to IsWitnessStandard. What does this do, and why is it needed?
17:55 <monlovesmango> does it allow the option to opt out of anchor txs?
17:55 <abubakarsadiq> It prevent adding a witness for a keyless anchor input, since it's no witness is needed to validate the utxo
17:55 <glozow> maybe the code link will help https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ccad5a5728c8916f8cec09e838839775a6026293#diff-ea6d307faa4ec9dfa5abcf6858bc19603079f2b8e110e1d62da4df98f4bdb9c0R228-R232
17:56 <glozow> abubakarsadiq: correct, no witness stuffing allowed
17:56 <glozow> anybody have a link to the test case for this? (you can find it by commenting out this line to see what fails)
17:56 <instagibbs> an adversary could take an honest spend, add stuff to witness, propagate it at a lower feerate, and honest user would have to pay incremental fees to replace it...
17:57 <instagibbs> (and the adversary could just keep doing it)
17:57 <abubakarsadiq> the tx is just not standard, but still valid right?
17:58 <glozow> ye, `IsWitnessStandard`
17:58 <vostrnad> abubakarsadiq: yes, but miners have no reason to inflate your tx if it doesn't malleate it
17:59 <glozow> test: https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/da083d4bbdb37737f5080fada97bd15f5a8bfb2d/test/functional/mempool_accept.py#L399-L414
18:00 <glozow> that's time
18:00 <glozow> #endmeeting

{% endirc %}
