---
layout: pr
date: 2024-12-04
title: "Track and use all potential peers for orphan resolution"
pr: 31397
authors: [glozow]
components: ["p2p"]
host: glozow
status: upcoming
commit:
---

## Notes

- (Transaction) **orphan resolution** is a process that kicks off when we are missing UTXOs to
  validate an unconfirmed transaction.

  - On master, we [request missing parents by txid](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/dbc8ba12f3b3548dd6955293c5d650320ca39c5b/src/node/txdownloadman_impl.cpp#L316-L365).

  - BIP 331 also defines a way to [explicitly request a transaction's ancestor package](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0331.mediawiki#handle-orphans-better).

  - Note that there is a difference between orphan *transactions* and orphan *blocks*.

- There are a number of [known orphan-handling problems](https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/%5BP2P%5D-known-TxOrphanage-problems)
which have existed for quite some time. While they represent inefficiencies when transactions are
relayed individually, these problems are even more relevant in package relay, where the orphanage is
part of a transaction's "critical path."

- Currently, we only attempt to resolve orphans with the peer who provided them. If this doesn't
  work out (e.g. they send a `notfound` or don't respond), we do not try again. In fact, we can't,
because we've already forgotten who else could help.

- The `TxRequestTracker`, introduced in [PR #19988](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/19988),
  is a data structure that tracks hashes of transactions to download and the candidate peers for
requesting those transactions. It schedules requests to send, helps avoid duplicate in-flight
transaction requests, and encodes prioritization of peers.

- In transaction download, outbound peers are preferred over inbound peers, though the
  `TxRequestTracker` does not have internal knowledge of connection directions; the preference is
expressed by adding a delay to the announcement entry. In orphan resolution, there are similar
reasons for preferring outbound over inbound peers.

- When a transaction is rejected from or accepted to mempool, we call `ForgetTxHash` on the
  `TxRequestTracker`, indicating that we have successfully downloaded the transaction. Downloading
it from a different peer will not make the transaction valid, so we do not need to keep it around.

## Questions

1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

1. Define orphan resolution, in your own words.

1. Prior to this PR, what are the steps for orphan resolution, starting from when we notice that the
   transaction has missing inputs? Where in the code does this happen?

1. What are the ways we may fail to resolve an orphan with the peer we request its parents from?
   What are some reasons things this may happen, honest or otherwise? (Hint: one honest example is
that the peer disconnects before responding to our request, perhaps because they are going offline)

1. Can you come up with an attack to prevent a node from downloading a 1p1c package by exploiting
   today's orphan resolution behavior? Temporary and/or probabilistic censorship are ok.

1. What is the PR's solution to this problem?

1. Can you think of any alternatives - does BIP 331 fix any of this?

1. In this PR, which peers do we identify as potential candidates for orphan resolution, and why?

1. What does the node do if a peer announces a transaction that is currently a to-be-resolved orphan?

1. Prior to this PR, what are all the `TxOrphanage` methods that remove an orphan, and where in
   the code are they called? (Hint: you should end up with 5 links to code)

1. Take a look at the
   [logic](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/c04d1a876cdbcd159c53dde55d57a55675c41f38#diff-3fc44df0a49b8a2fa4cb515b41fae470b794c32c93e632edb18ae14e8fcb159dR462-R481)
for adding a transaction to the orphanage and `m_orphan_resolution_tracker`. Is it possible that
there are candidate peers but `AddTx` is not called - how? Why is that important?

1. This PR edits some of the erasures to potentially keep the transaction in the orphanage and only
   modify the announcers list instead. Which places are these, and why? (Hint: for example,
`EraseForPeer` is called when a peer disconnects)

1. Commit
   [7badc73](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/7badc7e004e288aef645404b1b09699be8b87d1e)
stores missing parent txids in the `TxOrphanage` entry. Another approach could be to re-calculate
the missing parents prior to sending out requests; the missing parents may change over time as well.
Which approach do you prefer, and why?

1. Should it be possible for a transaction to be in `m_orphanage` but not
   `m_orphan_resolution_tracker`? Why or why not? How might you test this?

1. Why might we prefer to resolve orphans with outbound peers over inbound peers?

1. What are the disadvantages of resolving orphans by requesting parent txids? (Hint: see [BIP 331](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0331.mediawiki#handle-orphans-better)). Does this PR change that?

1. Commit [3e16a36](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/3e16a36959f70da59846621f099c1f1df4a210ed)
edits the 1p1c logic to no longer try packages of transactions from different peers. What was the
original motivation for this section, and why is removing it ok?

## Meeting Log

### Meeting 1

{% irc %}
17:00 <glozow> #startmeeting
17:00 <monlovesmango> hey
17:00 <Guest68> hi
17:00 <halloy6647> hello everyone
17:00 <danielabrozzoni> hi
17:00 <CosmikDebris> hello
17:00 <glozow> Welcome to PR review club! Feel free to say hi to let us know you're here. Any first-timers?
17:01 <glozow> We're looking at #31397 today, notes and questions in the usual place: https://bitcoincore.reviews/31397
17:01 <marcofleon> woo!
17:01 <glozow> Did anybody get a chance to review the PR and/or look at the notes?
17:01 <glozow> marcofleon: welcome!
17:02 <chinggg> second-timer here. I created txorphan fuzz target 2 year ago mentored by marco
17:02 <marcofleon> other marco
17:02 <marcofleon> Yeah I reviewed the PR, read through the commits
17:02 <glozow> chinggg: welcome back :) I think I remember your early package fuzz target
17:02 <glozow> Fantastic
17:02 <chinggg> Yeah I also reviewed the code
17:02 <danielabrozzoni> I reviewed the PR, focusing on header files to understand the high-level structure, didn't have time for an in-depth review
17:03 <instagibbs> hi reviewed all but still chewing on the major commit
17:03 <instagibbs> lot going on there
17:03 <glozow> danielabrozzoni: Great approach! I also often start with headers and tests
17:03 <glozow> Let's jump in with the questions then. If anybody has their own questions, please feel free to ask at any time.
17:04 <glozow> Define orphan resolution, in your own words.
17:04 <premitive2> It's when a node receives a transaction that contains inputs referencing a transaction it doesn't have and then performs actions to find the parent
17:05 <monlovesmango> when a node tries to request the missing parent transaction for a child transaction it has received
17:05 <chinggg> when downloading tx that missing parents, we need to query the peer again to confirm?
17:05 <marcofleon> getting txs that are orphans to possibly get into the mempool by finding their ancestors. process starts when you get a tx that has missing inputs
17:06 <glozow> Great answers! Yes, we're trying to find the missing inputs of an unconfirmed transaction. It's called an orphan because it's missing at least one parent.
17:06 <glozow> Prior to this PR, what are the steps for orphan resolution, starting from when we notice that the transaction has missing inputs? Bonus points if you can get code links
17:07 <luisschwab> We just ask the peer that gave us the orphan transaction for the parent. If he doesn't have it, we can't resolve it.
17:07 <marcofleon> https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ae69fc37e4fff237a119225061d68f69e6cd61d7/src/node/txdownloadman_impl.cpp#L315C5-L392C10
17:07 <glozow> luisschwab: great start. Is it necessarily the case that we won't be able to resolve the orphan if the first peer doesn't respond?
17:08 <glozow> marcofleon: bingo
17:08 <instagibbs> if another peer advertises the parent via INV, we can still ask them for it, or if we get another orphan with the same missing parent, we will try them after a timeout?
17:09 <glozow> instagibbs: yep, that's what I was thinking of
17:09 <glozow> Hope is not lost if the first one fails, but we don't actively retry to resolve this specific orphan.
17:09 <instagibbs> 👍
17:10 <luisschwab> got it
17:10 <marcofleon> is that the  GetChildrenFromDifferentPeer?
17:10 <chinggg> In MempoolRejectedTx, we check if (state.GetResult() == TxValidationResult::TX_MISSING_INPUTS), where we notice that the transaction has missing inputs. The link is already in notes?
17:11 <marcofleon> instagibbs: that part you were talking about i mean
17:12 <glozow> marcofleon: yes kind of! If we receive the parent somehow and it's low feerate, we might pick this orphan back up in `Find1P1CPackage` that way
17:12 <instagibbs> that's specifically a 1P1C relay thing
17:12 <marcofleon> got it
17:12 <instagibbs> I was more thinking about when do we ask for parents which isnt 1p1c per se
17:12 <glozow> But not necessarily - instagibbs is also referring to the case where we just accept the parent normally, and then schedule this orphan for processing https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/39950e148d80eec7ef18ff2858453d34a86c15cb/src/node/txdownloadman_impl.cpp#L299
17:13 <marcofleon> nice, thanks for the link
17:13 <glozow> And when we just happened to download the child before the parent
17:13 <glozow> What are the ways we may fail to resolve an orphan with the peer we request its parents from? What are some reasons things this may happen, honest or otherwise?
17:14 <glozow> I'm thinking of 3 different ways, if that's a helpful hint
17:15 <marcofleon> peer just doesn't have it so sends a notfound
17:15 <CosmikDebris> the peer may disconnect, the peer may have evicted the parent
17:15 <glozow> marcofleon: yes!
17:15 <glozow> CosmikDebris: yep!
17:15 <glozow> and a 3rd one?
17:15 <chinggg> malicious peer?
17:15 <marcofleon> announces a fake parent...? something malicious yeah
17:16 <glozow> marcofleon: yes!
17:16 <glozow> actually, there is a 4th
17:16 <glozow> 👀
17:17 <luisschwab> maybe the request gets blocked by the network along the way?
17:17 <glozow> marcofleon: specifically by "fake parent" I'm thinking the tx with a malleated witness. Given that the txid can be the same, they have responded to our request, but since it's invalid it doesn't help us resolve the orphan.
17:17 <glozow> luisschwab: close enough! I was thinking "you just don't get a response from them" so the request times out.
17:18 <glozow> Can you come up with an attack to prevent a node from downloading a 1p1c package by exploiting today’s orphan resolution behavior?
17:18 <marcofleon> makes sense
17:19 <marcofleon> The peer could just withhold the parent on purpose right? Because it's the only one we try
17:19 <monlovesmango> malicious actor filling up orphanage?
17:19 <marcofleon> But I guess you were saying it's still possible to find the parent later on?
17:20 <premitive2> Is there a way to overrun the orphan store with fake child txs from different peers? I know there's a limit to the orphaned txs kept around, but I don't know the conditions in which new orphans can replace old ones
17:20 <glozow> premitive2: we evict randomly. so yes, if you just send lots of orphans, most likely you can get other orphans evicted
17:20 <glozow> marcofleon: yes, that only works if you are the one who sends the orphan. is that something you can try to guarantee?
17:22 <instagibbs> the attacker INV-ing the parent wouldn't stop you from eventually asking the honest relayer, right?
17:22 <marcofleon> you'd have to target the node somehow. but yeah I'm not actually sure how a peer would ensure that they were the first ones to send you the orphan
17:23 <glozow> instagibbs: mhm, they can't stop you from asking
17:23 <glozow> for 1p1c with BIP133 though, people wouldn't announce the parent
17:23 <glozow> because of fee filter
17:24 <glozow> marcofleon: the answer I'm looking for is - they send you the orphan unsolicited :)
17:24 <glozow> since you already have the tx in orphanage, you ignore everyone else who announces it
17:25 <marcofleon> Got it yeah. Just don't go through the normal process of announcing and waiting for the request
17:25 <marcofleon> and could be an advantage
17:28 <glozow> What is the PR’s solution to this problem?
17:28 <monlovesmango> request parent tx from every peer that send the orphan
17:29 <glozow> let's try to be more specific!
17:30 <chinggg> instead of just querying and waiting for the peer who provided the tx, refactor the code and introduce m_orphan_resolution_tracker to query from multiple peer candidates with some scheduling
17:31 <glozow> yes, we're getting warmer! when we find that a tx has missing inputs, instead of adding the parent to our tx request tracker, what do we do?
17:31 <premitive2> There's also reasonable expirations for orphans and delays https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31397/files#diff-3fc44df0a49b8a2fa4cb515b41fae470b794c32c93e632edb18ae14e8fcb159dR259
17:33 <instagibbs> we add the orphan itself to a new orphan tx request tracker, so when the timer goes off for that, we "immediately" add the missing parents to the regular request tracker
17:34 <glozow> instagibbs: bingo
17:34 <glozow> Does BIP 331 fix any of this?
17:34 <dergoegge> I was wondering why we need another txrequest tracker instance for this? couldn’t we just keep track of announcers in the orphanage (same as in the PR) and then add requests for the parents to the existing tracker on future announcements?
17:35 <glozow> dergoegge: that's an idea. How would you schedule the requests?
17:35 <dergoegge> ideally at the same time
17:35 <glozow> Is there a cost to having another txrequest tracker? It's not that different from adding another std::map
17:35 <glozow> No, I mean, how would you load-balance between peers, bake in preferences, etc.
17:36 <dergoegge> isn't that what the existing tracker does?
17:36 <glozow> Oh, you mean adding a new type to the tracker? So we'd have txid type, wtxid type, and orphan?
17:37 <glozow> also note that the parent requests are added to the txrequest tracker
17:39 <dergoegge> I guess I'm wondering why we need the concept of tracking the resolution by orphan id, as opposed to just putting the requests for the parents in the existing tracker
17:39 <glozow> we do put the requests for the parents in the existing tracker
17:39 <glozow> Maybe we are crossing wires?
17:39 <instagibbs> mmmm he's asking why the add to new tracker, then "immediately" add to old one, vs just add to old one, I think
17:40 <dergoegge> yea
17:40 <instagibbs> add to old one with "proper delays"
17:40 <instagibbs> I didn't get far enough in my review to figure this out either 😅
17:40 <glozow> We might have multiple candidates for orphan resolution
17:41 <glozow> Oh I see what you're saying
17:42 <dergoegge> "multiple candidates" as in same parents different orphan?
17:42 <glozow> Perhaps that could work, where you're treating it as if all of them just announced the missing parents? I don't know how you'd add `ancpkginfo` orphan resolution easily this way though.
17:43 <glozow> different peers same orphan
17:43 <instagibbs> You'd also have to somehow track that you're no longer asking for any parents of an orphan in order to EraseOrphanOfPeer?
17:43 <marcofleon> yeah i was thinking it made sense with GetCandidatePeers. Having another tracker to separate out the orphan reso process
17:46 <glozow> will think about this idea some more
17:47 <dergoegge> me too 👍
17:47 <glozow> I think it's possible it works? My main questions would be (1) what is the cost of having a second tracker? Because it's the perfect data structure for this. (2) how do we make it extensible to package relay still.
17:48 <instagibbs> imo the cost is mostly an additional structure lying around that needs to stay in sync with other things
17:48 <dergoegge> 1) if we don't need it then it's just extra complexity 2) fair!
17:48 <marcofleon> The fact that there are candidates that be added or not added to that new tracker is why it made sense to me in the first place I guess is what i was saying
17:48 <marcofleon> can be*
17:49 <glozow> (1) shoving it into the existing tracker but needing to have extra logic could also be complexity!
17:49 <dergoegge> well in my mind it wouldn't need extra logic but I might be wrong, need to think more
17:49 <instagibbs> proof of code for this I think..
17:49 <glozow> but yeah, I don't like that we need to ensure m_orphanage and m_orphan_resolution_tracker are in sync. that's super fair
17:49 <dergoegge> frfr
17:50 <glozow> yeah let's see what the code would look like
17:50 <marcofleon> fr
17:50 <glozow> fr r r
17:50 <glozow> In this PR, which peers do we identify as potential candidates for orphan resolution, and why?
17:51 <glozow> btw, we're not even halfway through the questions. Lmk if y'all would like another session tomorrow. We can make it happen if there's 3+ people interested.
17:51 <marcofleon> I'm down
17:51 <monlovesmango> I'd be interested
17:51 <instagibbs> +1 if same time
17:51 <dergoegge> +1
17:51 <chinggg> sounds cool. the same time?
17:51 <luisschwab> +1
17:52 <premitive2> +1
17:52 <marcofleon> peers that are potential candidates are ones that are in any state but COMPLETED?
17:53 <glozow> marcofleon: yes, which means all of the peers who announced the transaction (that we still remember)
17:53 <instagibbs> I think it's anyone who INV'd us something we have in orphanage, or directly handed us a tx which ends up being an orphan
17:53 <premitive2> Those that have announced they have an orphan's ancestor?
17:53 <monlovesmango> dumb question but what does INV mean?
17:53 <instagibbs> sorry, sending INV aka inventory message
17:53 <instagibbs> short message "hey I have this txid or wtxid"
17:53 <monlovesmango> youre good, thank you!
17:53 <glozow> sending an INV is sending an "inventory" message containing the hash of something you have (e.g. tx), synonymous with announcing it
17:54 <monlovesmango> perfect that helps a lot thanks!
17:54 <glozow> premitive2: nope. We just presume that if you told us about a tx, you must know about all of its ancestors.
17:54 <instagibbs> remember we tack orphans by wtxid in this PR
17:54 <glozow> What does the node do if a peer announces a transaction that is currently a to-be-resolved orphan?
17:54 <instagibbs> and in amster i guess
17:56 <marcofleon> It checks if that peer is an orphan resolution candidate and if it is it adds it as an announcer
17:56 <marcofleon> and adds the inv to the orphan_resolution_tracker
17:56 <chinggg> "instead of adding it to m_txrequest, remember this peer as a potential orphan resolution candidate"
17:56 <glozow> marcofleon: chinggg: yes!
17:57 <glozow> why is that important? hint: we talked about a potential attack earlier....
17:57 <instagibbs> and its a candidate as long as the peer is still connected, and doesn't have too much in flight, pretty much?
17:57 <glozow> instagibbs: yeah. or until we resolve the orphan
17:58 <instagibbs> right i meant at "OrphanResolutionCandidate" time
17:58 <glozow> oh yes, yes
17:58 <glozow> in the future we can also add logic like "and they haven't already given us 20 orphans"
17:59 <glozow> I think it's really important to consider new announcers as orphan reso candidates, for the case where somebody frontruns and sends you an orphan unsolicited.
18:00 <instagibbs> if honest peer announces first, then attacker sends directly, we won't track as a candidate, right?
18:00 <marcofleon> Having multiple peers just makes it more likely to resolve the orphan it seems to me. And yeah less likely that that attack happens
18:00 <glozow> instagibbs: we will track the honest peer as a candidate. because it was an announcer of the orphan
18:00 <instagibbs> I'll re-read :)
18:00 <dergoegge> but it announced before we knew it is an orphan?
18:00 <glozow> yes
18:00 <instagibbs> actually i can write a test for this
18:01 <glozow> there should be tests for this in p2p_orphan_handling.py
18:01 <dergoegge> 🚀
18:01 <instagibbs> noice
18:01 <glozow> I write tests!
18:01 <glozow> Oh, we are out of time.
18:01 <glozow> Let's do the next half of the questions tomorrow
18:02 <glozow> #endmeeting
<!-- TODO: For additional meetings, add the logs to the same irc block. This ensures line numbers keep increasing, avoiding hyperlink conflicts for identical line numbers across meetings.

### Meeting 2

-->
{% endirc %}
